



Wolf - Wikipedia






































 




Wolf

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Type of canine
This article is about the wolf within the species Canis lupus. For other species of wolf and other uses, see Wolf (disambiguation).
"Grey Wolf" and "Gray Wolf" redirect here. For other uses, see Grey Wolf (disambiguation).
"Wolves" redirects here. For the English football club, see Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C.
"Canis lupus" redirects here. For the Mexican professional wrestler, see Canis Lupus (wrestler).




WolfTemporal range: Middle Pleistocene – present (810,000–0 YBP)[1]





Eurasian wolf (Canis lupus lupus) in the Kolmården Wildlife Park, Sweden


Conservation status


Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[2]


CITES Appendix II (CITES)[3][a]


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:

Animalia


Phylum:

Chordata


Class:

Mammalia


Order:

Carnivora


Family:

Canidae


Genus:

Canis


Species:

C. lupus


Binomial name


Canis lupusLinnaeus, 1758[4]


Subspecies



See Subspecies of Canis lupus






Global wolf range based on IUCN's 2018 assessment.[2]


The wolf (Canis lupus[b]; PL: wolves), also known as the gray wolf or grey wolf, is a large canine native to Eurasia and North America. More than thirty subspecies of Canis lupus have been recognized, and gray wolves, as popularly understood, comprise wild subspecies. The wolf is the largest extant member of the family Canidae. It is also distinguished from other Canis species by its less pointed ears and muzzle, as well as a shorter torso and a longer tail. The wolf is nonetheless related closely enough to smaller Canis species, such as the coyote and the golden jackal, to produce fertile hybrids with them. The banded fur of a wolf is usually mottled white, brown, gray, and black, although subspecies in the arctic region may be nearly all white.
Of all members of the genus Canis, the wolf is most specialized for cooperative game hunting as demonstrated by its physical adaptations to tackling large prey, its more social nature, and its highly advanced expressive behaviour including individual or group howling. It travels in nuclear families consisting of a mated pair accompanied by their offspring. Offspring may leave to form their own packs on the onset of sexual maturity and in response to competition for food within the pack. Wolves are also territorial and fights over territory are among the principal causes of wolf mortality. The wolf is mainly a carnivore and feeds on large wild hooved mammals as well as smaller animals, livestock, carrion, and garbage. Single wolves or mated pairs typically have higher success rates in hunting than do large packs. Pathogens and parasites, notably rabies virus, may infect wolves.
The global wild wolf population was estimated to be 300,000 in 2003 and is considered to be of Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Wolves have a long history of interactions with humans, having been despised and hunted in most pastoral communities because of their attacks on livestock, while conversely being respected in some agrarian and hunter-gatherer societies. The wolf is also considered the ancestor of the domestic dog. Although the fear of wolves exists in many human societies, the majority of recorded attacks on people have been attributed to animals suffering from rabies. Wolf attacks on humans are rare because wolves are relatively few, live away from people, and have developed a fear of humans because of their experiences with hunters, ranchers, and shepherds.

Contents

1 Etymology
2 Taxonomy

2.1 Subspecies
2.2 Evolution
2.3 Admixture with other canids


3 Description

3.1 Pelage


4 Ecology

4.1 Distribution and habitat
4.2 Diet
4.3 Interactions with other predators


5 Behaviour

5.1 Social structure
5.2 Communication
5.3 Reproduction
5.4 Hunting and feeding


6 Infections

6.1 Viral and bacterial
6.2 Parasitic


7 Status and conservation

7.1 North America
7.2 Eurasia


8 Relationships with humans

8.1 In culture

8.1.1 In folklore, religion and mythology
8.1.2 In fable and literature


8.2 Conflicts

8.2.1 Predation on livestock
8.2.2 Competition with dogs
8.2.3 Attacks on humans
8.2.4 Human hunting of wolves


8.3 As pets and working animals


9 Notes
10 References
11 Bibliography
12 External links


Etymology
See also: Wolf (name)
The English "wolf" stems from the Old English wulf, which is itself thought to be derived from the Proto-Germanic *wulfaz. The Proto-Indo-European root *wĺ̥kʷos may also be the source of the Latin word for the animal lupus (*lúkʷos).[5][6] The name "gray wolf" refers to the grayish colour of the species.[7]
Since pre-Christian times, Germanic peoples such as the Anglo-Saxons took on wulf as a prefix or suffix in their names. Examples include Wulfhere ("Wolf Army"), Cynewulf ("Royal Wolf"), Cēnwulf ("Bold Wolf"), Wulfheard ("Wolf-hard"), Earnwulf ("Eagle Wolf"), Wulfstān ("Wolf Stone") Æðelwulf ("Noble Wolf"), Wolfhroc ("Wolf-Frock"), Wolfhetan ("Wolf Hide"), Scrutolf ("Garb Wolf"), Wolfgang ("Wolf Gait") and Wolfdregil ("Wolf Runner").[8]

Taxonomy


Canine phylogeny with ages of divergence






 





 





 





 





 





 





 





 


Gray wolf 



 


 


Coyote 



 



1.10 mya


 


African wolf 



 



1.32 mya


 


Ethiopian wolf 



 



1.62 mya


 


Golden jackal 



 



1.92 mya


 


Dhole 



 



2.74 mya


 


African wild dog 



 



3.06 mya


 





 


Side-striped jackal 



 


 


Black-backed jackal 



 



2.62 mya



3.50 mya



Cladogram and divergence of the gray wolf (including the domestic dog) among its closest extant relatives[9]

In 1758, the Swedish botanist and zoologist Carl Linnaeus published in his Systema Naturae the binomial nomenclature.[4] Canis is the Latin word meaning "dog",[10] and under this genus he listed the doglike carnivores including domestic dogs, wolves, and jackals. He classified the domestic dog as Canis familiaris, and the wolf as Canis lupus.[4] Linnaeus considered the dog to be a separate species from the wolf because of its "cauda recurvata" (upturning tail) which is not found in any other canid.[11]

Subspecies
Main article: Subspecies of Canis lupus
Further information: Pleistocene wolf
In the third edition of Mammal Species of the World published in 2005, the mammalogist W. Christopher Wozencraft listed under C. lupus 36 wild subspecies, and proposed two additional subspecies: familiaris (Linnaeus, 1758) and dingo (Meyer, 1793). Wozencraft included hallstromi—the New Guinea singing dog—as a taxonomic synonym for the dingo. Wozencraft referred to a 1999 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) study as one of the guides in forming his decision, and listed the 38 subspecies of C. lupus under the biological common name of "wolf", the nominate subspecies being the Eurasian wolf (C. l. lupus) based on the type specimen that Linnaeus studied in Sweden.[12] Studies using paleogenomic techniques reveal that the modern wolf and the dog are sister taxa, as modern wolves are not closely related to the population of wolves that was first domesticated.[13] In 2019, a workshop hosted by the IUCN/Species Survival Commission's Canid Specialist Group considered the New Guinea singing dog and the dingo to be feral Canis familiaris, and therefore should not be assessed for the IUCN Red List.[14]

Evolution
Main article: Evolution of the wolf
Further information: Origin of the domestic dog
 A Canis etruscus skull in the Montevarchi Paleontological Museum
The phylogenetic descent of the extant wolf C. lupus from C. etruscus through C. mosbachensis is widely accepted.[15] The earliest fossils of C. lupus were found in what was once eastern Beringia at Old Crow, Yukon, Canada, and at Cripple Creek Sump, Fairbanks, Alaska. The age is not agreed upon but could date to one million years ago. Considerable morphological diversity existed among wolves by the Late Pleistocene. They had more robust skulls and teeth than modern wolves, often with a shortened snout, a pronounced development of the temporalis muscle, and robust premolars. It is proposed that these features were specialized adaptations for the processing of carcass and bone associated with the hunting and scavenging of Pleistocene megafauna. Compared with modern wolves, some Pleistocene wolves showed an increase in tooth breakage similar to that seen in the extinct dire wolf. This suggests they either often processed carcasses, or that they competed with other carnivores and needed to consume their prey quickly. Compared with those found in the modern spotted hyena, the frequency and location of tooth fractures in these wolves indicates they were habitual bone crackers.[16]
Genomic studies suggest modern wolves and dogs descend from a common ancestral wolf population[17][18][19] that existed 20,000 years ago.[17] A 2021 study found that the Himalayan wolf and the Indian plains wolf are part of a lineage that is basal to other wolves and split from them 200,000 years ago.[20] Other wolves appear to have originated in Beringia in an expansion that was driven by the huge ecological changes during the close of the Late Pleistocene.[21] A study in 2016 indicates that a population bottleneck was followed by a rapid radiation from an ancestral population at a time during, or just after, the Last Glacial Maximum. This implies the original morphologically diverse wolf populations were out-competed and replaced by more modern wolves.[22]
A 2016 genomic study suggests that Old World and New World wolves split around 12,500 years ago followed by the divergence of the lineage that led to dogs from other Old World wolves around 11,100–12,300 years ago.[19] An extinct Late Pleistocene wolf may have been the ancestor of the dog,[23][16] with the dog's similarity to the extant wolf being the result of genetic admixture between the two.[16] The dingo, Basenji, Tibetan Mastiff and Chinese indigenous breeds are basal members of the domestic dog clade. The divergence time for wolves in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia is estimated to be fairly recent at around 1,600 years ago. Among New World wolves, the Mexican wolf diverged around 5,400 years ago.[19]

Admixture with other canids
Main article: Canid hybrid
 Wolf–dog hybrids in the wild animal park at Kadzidłowo, Poland. Left: product of a male wolf and a female spaniel; right: from a female wolf and a male West Siberian Laika
In the distant past, there has been gene flow between African wolves, golden jackals, and gray wolves. The African wolf is a descendant of a genetically admixed canid of 72% wolf and 28% Ethiopian wolf ancestry. One African wolf from the Egyptian Sinai Peninsula shows admixture with Middle Eastern gray wolves and dogs.[24] There is evidence of gene flow between golden jackals and Middle Eastern wolves, less so with European and Asian wolves, and least with North American wolves. This indicates the golden jackal ancestry found in North American wolves may have occurred before the divergence of the Eurasian and North American wolves.[25]
The common ancestor of the coyote and the wolf has admixed with a ghost population of an extinct unidentified canid. This canid is genetically close to the dhole and evolved after the divergence of the African hunting dog from the other canid species. The basal position of the coyote compared to the wolf is proposed to be due to the coyote retaining more of the mitochondrial genome of this unidentified canid.[24] Similarly, a museum specimen of a wolf from southern China collected in 1963 showed a genome that was 12–14% admixed from this unknown canid.[26] In North America, most coyotes and wolves show varying degrees of past genetic admixture. The red wolf of the southeastern United States is a hybrid animal with 40%:60% wolf to coyote ancestry. In addition, there was found to be 60%:40% wolf to coyote genetics in Eastern timber wolves, and 75%:25% in the Great Lakes region wolves.[25]
In more recent times, some male Italian wolves originated from dog ancestry, which indicates female wolves will breed with male dogs in the wild.[27] In the Caucasus Mountains, ten percent of dogs including livestock guardian dogs, are first generation hybrids.[28] Although mating between golden jackals and wolves has never been observed, evidence of jackal-wolf hybridization was discovered through mitochondrial DNA analysis of jackals living in the Caucasus Mountains[28] and in Bulgaria.[29]
In 2021, a genetic study found that the dog's similarity to the extant gray wolf was the result of substantial dog-into-wolf gene flow, with almost negligible wolf-into-dog gene flow since the dog's domestication. Some gray wolves were related to all ancient and modern dogs.[30]

Description
 A North American wolf
The wolf is the largest extant member of the Canidae family,[31] and is further distinguished from coyotes and jackals by a broader snout, shorter ears, a shorter torso and a longer tail.[32][31] It is slender and powerfully built, with a large, deeply descending rib cage, a sloping back, and a heavily muscled neck.[33] The wolf's legs are moderately longer than those of other canids, which enables the animal to move swiftly, and to overcome the deep snow that covers most of its geographical range in winter.[34] The ears are relatively small and triangular.[33] The wolf's head is large and heavy, with a wide forehead, strong jaws and a long, blunt muzzle.[35] The skull is 230–280 mm (9–11 in) in length and 130–150 mm (5–6 in) in width.[36] The teeth are heavy and large, making them better suited to crushing bone than those of other canids. They are not as specialized as those found in hyenas though.[37][38] Its molars have a flat chewing surface, but not to the same extent as the coyote, whose diet contains more vegetable matter.[39] Females tend to have narrower muzzles and foreheads, thinner necks, slightly shorter legs, and less massive shoulders than males.[40]

 A wolf skeleton housed in the Wolf Museum, Abruzzo National Park, Italy
Adult wolves measure 105–160 cm (41–63 in) in length and 80–85 cm (31–33 in) at shoulder height.[35] The tail measures 29–50 cm (11–20 in) in length, the ears 90–110 mm (3+1⁄2–4+3⁄8 in) in height, and the hind feet are 220–250 mm (8+5⁄8–9+7⁄8 in).[41] The size and weight of the modern wolf increases proportionally with latitude in accord with Bergmann's rule.[42] The mean body mass of the wolf is 40 kg (88 lb), the smallest specimen recorded at 12 kg (26 lb) and the largest at 79.4 kg (175 lb).[43][35] On average, European wolves weigh 38.5 kg (85 lb), North American wolves 36 kg (79 lb), and Indian and Arabian wolves 25 kg (55 lb).[44] Females in any given wolf population typically weigh 2.3–4.5 kg (5–10 lb) less than males. Wolves weighing over 54 kg (119 lb) are uncommon, though exceptionally large individuals have been recorded in Alaska and Canada.[45] In central Russia, exceptionally large males can reach a weight of 69–79 kg (152–174 lb).[41]

Pelage
 Wolf in Spiti Valley, northern India
The wolf has very dense and fluffy winter fur, with a short undercoat and long, coarse guard hairs.[35] Most of the undercoat and some guard hairs are shed in spring and grow back in autumn.[44] The longest hairs occur on the back, particularly on the front quarters and neck. Especially long hairs grow on the shoulders and almost form a crest on the upper part of the neck. The hairs on the cheeks are elongated and form tufts. The ears are covered in short hairs and project from the fur. Short, elastic and closely adjacent hairs are present on the limbs from the elbows down to the calcaneal tendons.[35] The winter fur is highly resistant to the cold. Wolves in northern climates can rest comfortably in open areas at −40 °C (−40 °F) by placing their muzzles between the rear legs and covering their faces with their tail. Wolf fur provides better insulation than dog fur and does not collect ice when warm breath is condensed against it.[44]
In cold climates, the wolf can reduce the flow of blood near its skin to conserve body heat. The warmth of the foot pads is regulated independently from the rest of the body and is maintained at just above tissue-freezing point where the pads come in contact with ice and snow.[46] In warm climates, the fur is coarser and scarcer than in northern wolves.[35] Female wolves tend to have smoother furred limbs than males and generally develop the smoothest overall coats as they age. Older wolves generally have more white hairs on the tip of the tail, along the nose, and on the forehead. Winter fur is retained longest by lactating females, although with some hair loss around their teats.[40] Hair length on the middle of the back is 60–70 mm (2+3⁄8–2+3⁄4 in), and the guard hairs on the shoulders generally do not exceed 90 mm (3+1⁄2 in), but can reach 110–130 mm (4+3⁄8–5+1⁄8 in).[35]

 Wolves in the La Boissière-du-Doré Zoo, France
A wolf's coat colour is determined by its guard hairs. Wolves usually have some hairs that are white, brown, gray and black.[47] The coat of the Eurasian wolf is a mixture of ochreous (yellow to orange) and rusty ochreous (orange/red/brown) colours with light gray. The muzzle is pale ochreous gray, and the area of the lips, cheeks, chin, and throat is white. The top of the head, forehead, under and between the eyes, and between the eyes and ears is gray with a reddish film. The neck is ochreous. Long, black tips on the hairs along the back form a broad stripe, with black hair tips on the shoulders, upper chest and rear of the body. The sides of the body, tail, and outer limbs are a pale dirty ochreous colour, while the inner sides of the limbs, belly, and groin are white. Apart from those wolves which are pure white or black, these tones vary little across geographical areas, although the patterns of these colours vary between individuals.[48]
In North America, the coat colours of wolves follow Gloger's rule, wolves in the Canadian arctic being white and those in southern Canada, the U.S., and Mexico being predominantly gray. In some areas of the Rocky Mountains of Alberta and British Columbia, the coat colour is predominantly black, some being blue-gray and some with silver and black.[47] Differences in coat colour between sexes is absent in Eurasia;[49] females tend to have redder tones in North America.[50] Black-coloured wolves in North America acquired their colour from wolf-dog admixture after the first arrival of dogs across the Bering Strait 12,000 to 14,000 years ago.[51] Research into the inheritance of white colour from dogs into wolves has yet to be undertaken.[52]

Ecology
Distribution and habitat
Main article: Wolf distribution
 An Italian wolf in a mountainous habitat in the Apennines in Sassoferrato, Italy
Wolves occur across Eurasia and North America. However, deliberate human persecution because of livestock predation and fear of attacks on humans has reduced the wolf's range to about one-third of its historic range; the wolf is now extirpated (locally extinct) from much of its range in Western Europe, the United States and Mexico, and completely in Ireland, the United Kingdom, and Japan. In modern times, the wolf occurs mostly in wilderness and remote areas. The wolf can be found between sea level and 3,000 m (9,800 ft). Wolves live in forests, inland wetlands, shrublands, grasslands (including Arctic tundra), pastures, deserts, and rocky peaks on mountains.[2] Habitat use by wolves depends on the abundance of prey, snow conditions, livestock densities, road densities, human presence and topography.[39]

Diet
 A wolf carrying a caribou hindquarter, Denali National Park, Alaska
Like all land mammals that are pack hunters, the wolf feeds predominantly on wild herbivorous hoofed mammals that can be divided into large size 240–650 kg (530–1,430 lb) and medium size 23–130 kg (51–287 lb), and have a body mass similar to that of the combined mass of the pack members.[53][54] The wolf specializes in preying on the vulnerable individuals of large prey,[39] with a pack of 15 able to bring down an adult moose.[55] The variation in diet between wolves living on different continents is based on the variety of hoofed mammals and of available smaller and domesticated prey.[56]
In North America, the wolf's diet is dominated by wild large hoofed mammals (ungulates) and medium-sized mammals. In Asia and Europe, their diet is dominated by wild medium-sized hoofed mammals and domestic species. The wolf depends on wild species, and if these are not readily available, as in Asia, the wolf is more reliant on domestic species.[56] Across Eurasia, wolves prey mostly on moose, red deer, roe deer and wild boar.[57] In North America, important range-wide prey are elk, moose, caribou, white-tailed deer and mule deer.[58] They also prey on bison and muskoxen.[59] Wolves can digest their meal in a few hours and can feed several times in one day, making quick use of large quantities of meat.[60] A well-fed wolf stores fat under the skin, around the heart, intestines, kidneys, and bone marrow, particularly during the autumn and winter.[61]
Nonetheless, wolves are not fussy eaters. Smaller-sized animals that may supplement their diet include rodents, rabbits,[59] hares, insectivores and smaller carnivores. They frequently eat waterfowl and their eggs. When such foods are insufficient, they prey on lizards, snakes, frogs, and large insects when available.[62] Wolves in northern Minnesota prey on northern pike in freshwater streams.[63] The diet of coastal wolves in Alaska includes 20% salmon,[64] while those of coastal wolves in British Columbia includes 25% marine sources, and those on the nearby islands 75%.[65]
In Europe, wolves eat apples, pears, figs, melons, berries and cherries. In North America, wolves eat blueberries and raspberries. Wolves also eat grass, which may provide some vitamins, but is most likely used mainly to induce vomiting to rid themselves of intestinal parasites or long guard hairs.[66] They are known to eat the berries of mountain-ash, lily of the valley, bilberries, cowberries, European black nightshade, grain crops, and the shoots of reeds.[62]
In times of scarcity, wolves will readily eat carrion.[62] In Eurasian areas with dense human activity, many wolf populations are forced to subsist largely on livestock and garbage.[57] Prey in North America continue to occupy suitable habitats with low human density, the wolves eating livestock and garbage only in dire circumstances.[67] Cannibalism is not uncommon in wolves during harsh winters, when packs often attack weak or injured wolves and may eat the bodies of dead pack members.[62][68][69]

Interactions with other predators
Wolves typically dominate other canid species in areas where they both occur. In North America, incidents of wolves killing coyotes are common, particularly in winter, when coyotes feed on wolf kills. Wolves may attack coyote den sites, digging out and killing their pups, though rarely eating them. There are no records of coyotes killing wolves, though coyotes may chase wolves if they outnumber them.[70] According to a press release by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in 1921, the infamous Custer Wolf relied on coyotes to accompany him and warn him of danger. Though they fed from his kills, he never allowed them to approach him.[71] Interactions have been observed in Eurasia between wolves and golden jackals, the latter's numbers being comparatively small in areas with high wolf densities.[35][70][72] Wolves also kill red, Arctic and corsac foxes, usually in disputes over carcasses, sometimes eating them.[35][73]

 A wolf, a bear, coyotes and ravens compete over a kill
Brown bears typically dominate wolf packs in disputes over carcasses, while wolf packs mostly prevail against bears when defending their den sites. Both species kill each other's young. Wolves eat the brown bears they kill, while brown bears seem to eat only young wolves.[74] Wolf interactions with American black bears are much rarer because of differences in habitat preferences. Wolves have been recorded on numerous occasions actively seeking out American black bears in their dens and killing them without eating them. Unlike brown bears, American black bears frequently lose against wolves in disputes over kills.[75] Wolves also dominate and sometimes kill wolverines, and will chase off those that attempt to scavenge from their kills. Wolverines escape from wolves in caves or up trees.[76]
Wolves may interact and compete with felids, such as the Eurasian lynx, which may feed on smaller prey where wolves are present[77] and may be suppressed by large wolf populations.[78] Wolves encounter cougars along portions of the Rocky Mountains and adjacent mountain ranges. Wolves and cougars typically avoid encountering each other by hunting at different elevations for different prey (niche partitioning). In winter, when snow accumulation forces their prey into valleys, interactions between the two species become more likely. Wolves in packs usually dominate cougars and can steal their kills or even kill them,[79] while one-to-one encounters tend to be dominated by the cat. There are several documented cases of cougars killing wolves.[80] Wolves more broadly affect cougar population dynamics and distribution by dominating territory and prey opportunities and disrupting the feline's behaviour.[81] Wolf and Siberian tiger interactions are well-documented in the Russian Far East, where tigers significantly depress wolf numbers, sometimes to the point of localized extinction. Only human depletion of tiger numbers appears to protect wolves from competitive exclusion from them. With perhaps only four proven records of tigers killing wolves, these cases are rare; attacks appear to be competitive rather than predatory in nature.[82][77]
In Israel, Central Asia and India wolves may encounter striped hyenas, usually in disputes over carcasses. Striped hyenas feed extensively on wolf-killed carcasses in areas where the two species interact. One-to-one, hyenas dominate wolves, and may prey on them,[83] but wolf packs can drive off single or outnumbered hyenas.[84][85] There is at least one case in Israel of a hyena associating and cooperating with a wolf pack. It is proposed that the hyena could benefit from the wolves' superior ability to hunt large, agile prey. The wolves could benefit from the hyena's superior sense of smell, to locate and dig out tortoises, to crack open large bones, and to tear open discarded food containers like tin cans.[86]

Behaviour


See also: Dog behaviour
Social structure
See also: Pack (canine) § Pack behavior in grey wolves
 Indian wolves at the Mysore Zoo
The wolf is a social animal.[35] Its populations consist of packs and lone wolves, most lone wolves being temporarily alone while they disperse from packs to form their own or join another one.[87] The wolf's basic social unit is the nuclear family consisting of a mated pair accompanied by their offspring.[35] The average pack size in North America is eight wolves and in Europe 5.5 wolves.[42] The average pack across Eurasia consists of a family of eight wolves (two adults, juveniles, and yearlings),[35] or sometimes two or three such families,[39] with examples of exceptionally large packs consisting of up to 42 wolves being known.[88] Cortisol levels in wolves rise significantly when a pack member dies, indicating the presence of stress.[89] During times of prey abundance caused by calving or migration, different wolf packs may join together temporarily.[35]
Offspring typically stay in the pack for 10–54 months before dispersing.[90] Triggers for dispersal include the onset of sexual maturity and competition within the pack for food.[91] The distance travelled by dispersing wolves varies widely; some stay in the vicinity of the parental group, while other individuals may travel great distances of upwards of 206 km (128 mi), 390 km (240 mi), and 670 km (420 mi) from their natal (birth) packs.[92] A new pack is usually founded by an unrelated dispersing male and female, travelling together in search of an area devoid of other hostile packs.[93] Wolf packs rarely adopt other wolves into their fold and typically kill them. In the rare cases where other wolves are adopted, the adoptee is almost invariably an immature animal of one to three years old, and unlikely to compete for breeding rights with the mated pair. This usually occurs between the months of February and May. Adoptee males may mate with an available pack female and then form their own pack. In some cases, a lone wolf is adopted into a pack to replace a deceased breeder.[88]
Wolves are territorial and generally establish territories far larger than they require to survive assuring a steady supply of prey. Territory size depends largely on the amount of prey available and the age of the pack's pups. They tend to increase in size in areas with low prey populations,[94] or when the pups reach the age of six months when they have the same nutritional needs as adults.[95] Wolf packs travel constantly in search of prey, covering roughly 9% of their territory per day, on average 25 km/d (16 mi/d). The core of their territory is on average 35 km2 (14 sq mi) where they spend 50% of their time.[94] Prey density tends to be much higher on the territory's periphery. Except out of desperation, wolves tend to avoid hunting on the fringes of their range to avoid fatal confrontations with neighbouring packs.[96] The smallest territory on record was held by a pack of six wolves in northeastern Minnesota, which occupied an estimated 33 km2 (13 sq mi), while the largest was held by an Alaskan pack of ten wolves encompassing 6,272 km2 (2,422 sq mi).[95] Wolf packs are typically settled, and usually leave their accustomed ranges only during severe food shortages.[35] Territorial fights are among the principal causes of wolf mortality, one study concluding that 14–65% of wolf deaths in Minnesota and the Denali National Park and Preserve were due to other wolves.[97]

Communication
Main article: Wolf communication




Wolves howling


Rallying cry


Problems playing these files? See media help.

Wolves communicate using vocalizations, body postures, scent, touch, and taste.[98] The phases of the moon have no effect on wolf vocalization, and despite popular belief, wolves do not howl at the moon.[99] Wolves howl to assemble the pack usually before and after hunts, to pass on an alarm particularly at a den site, to locate each other during a storm, while crossing unfamiliar territory, and to communicate across great distances.[100] Wolf howls can under certain conditions be heard over areas of up to 130 km2 (50 sq mi).[39] Other vocalizations include growls, barks and whines. Wolves do not bark as loudly or continuously as dogs do in confrontations, rather barking a few times and then retreating from a perceived danger.[101] Aggressive or self-assertive wolves are characterized by their slow and deliberate movements, high body posture and raised hackles, while submissive ones carry their bodies low, flatten their fur, and lower their ears and tail.[102]
Scent marking involves urine, feces, and anal gland scents. This is more effective at advertising territory than howling and is often used in combination with scratch marks. Wolves increase their rate of scent marking when they encounter the marks of wolves from other packs. Lone wolves will rarely mark, but newly bonded pairs will scent mark the most.[39] These marks are generally left every 240 m (260 yd) throughout the territory on regular travelways and junctions. Such markers can last for two to three weeks,[95] and are typically placed near rocks, boulders, trees, or the skeletons of large animals.[35] Raised leg urination is considered to be one of the most important forms of scent communication in the wolf, making up 60–80% of all scent marks observed.[103]

Reproduction
See also: Canine reproduction
 Korean wolves mating in the Tama Zoological Park, Japan
Wolves are monogamous, mated pairs usually remaining together for life. Should one of the pair die, another mate is found quickly.[104] With wolves in the wild, inbreeding does not occur where outbreeding is possible.[105] Wolves become mature at the age of two years and sexually mature from the age of three years.[104] The age of first breeding in wolves depends largely on environmental factors: when food is plentiful, or when wolf populations are heavily managed, wolves can rear pups at younger ages to better exploit abundant resources. Females are capable of producing pups every year, one litter annually being the average.[106] Oestrus and rut begin in the second half of winter and lasts for two weeks.[104]

 Iberian wolf pups stimulating their mother to regurgitate some food
Dens are usually constructed for pups during the summer period. When building dens, females make use of natural shelters like fissures in rocks, cliffs overhanging riverbanks and holes thickly covered by vegetation. Sometimes, the den is the appropriated burrow of smaller animals such as foxes, badgers or marmots. An appropriated den is often widened and partly remade. On rare occasions, female wolves dig burrows themselves, which are usually small and short with one to three openings. The den is usually constructed not more than 500 m (550 yd) away from a water source. It typically faces southwards where it can be better warmed by sunlight exposure, and the snow can thaw more quickly. Resting places, play areas for the pups, and food remains are commonly found around wolf dens. The odor of urine and rotting food emanating from the denning area often attracts scavenging birds like magpies and ravens. Though they mostly avoid areas within human sight, wolves have been known to nest near domiciles, paved roads and railways.[107] During pregnancy, female wolves remain in a den located away from the peripheral zone of their territories, where violent encounters with other packs are less likely to occur.[108]
The gestation period lasts 62–75 days with pups usually being born in the spring months or early summer in very cold places such as on the tundra. Young females give birth to four to five young, and older females from six to eight young and up to 14. Their mortality rate is 60–80%.[109] Newborn wolf pups look similar to German Shepherd Dog pups.[110] They are born blind and deaf and are covered in short soft grayish-brown fur. They weigh 300–500 g (10+1⁄2–17+3⁄4 oz) at birth and begin to see after nine to 12 days. The milk canines erupt after one month. Pups first leave the den after three weeks. At one-and-a-half months of age, they are agile enough to flee from danger. Mother wolves do not leave the den for the first few weeks, relying on the fathers to provide food for them and their young. Pups begin to eat solid food at the age of three to four weeks. They have a fast growth rate during their first four months of life: during this period, a pup's weight can increase nearly 30 times.[109][111] Wolf pups begin play-fighting at the age of three weeks, though unlike young coyotes and foxes, their bites are gentle and controlled. Actual fights to establish hierarchy usually occur at five to eight weeks of age. This is in contrast to young coyotes and foxes, which may begin fighting even before the onset of play behaviour.[112] By autumn, the pups are mature enough to accompany the adults on hunts for large prey.[108]

Hunting and feeding
Main article: Hunting behavior of gray wolves
 Wolves pursuing a bull elk
Single wolves or mated pairs typically have higher success rates in hunting than do large packs; single wolves have occasionally been observed to kill large prey such as moose, bison and muskoxen unaided.[113][114] This contrasts with the commonly held belief that larger packs benefit from cooperative hunting to bring down large game.[114] The size of a wolf hunting pack is related to the number of pups that survived the previous winter, adult survival, and the rate of dispersing wolves leaving the pack. The optimal pack size for hunting elk is four wolves, and for bison a large pack size is more successful.[115]
Wolves move around their territory when hunting, using the same trails for extended periods. After snowfalls, wolves find their old trails and continue using them. These follow the banks of rivers, the shorelines of lakes, ravines overgrown with shrubs, plantations, or roads and human paths.[116] Wolves are nocturnal predators. During the winter, a pack will commence hunting in the twilight of early evening and will hunt all night, traveling tens of kilometres. Sometimes hunting large prey occurs during the day. During the summer, wolves generally tend to hunt individually, ambushing their prey and rarely giving pursuit.[117]
When hunting large gregarious prey, wolves will try to isolate an individual from its group.[118] If successful, a wolf pack can bring down game that will feed it for days, but one error in judgement can lead to serious injury or death. Most large prey have developed defensive adaptations and behaviours. Wolves have been killed while attempting to bring down bison, elk, moose, muskoxen, and even by one of their smallest hoofed prey, the white-tailed deer. With smaller prey like beaver, geese, and hares, there is no risk to the wolf.[119] Although people often believe wolves can easily overcome any of their prey, their success rate in hunting hoofed prey is usually low.[120]

 Two wolves feeding on a white-tailed deer
The wolf must give chase and gain on its fleeing prey, slow it down by biting through thick hair and hide, and then disable it enough to begin feeding.[119] After chasing and then confronting a large prey animal, the wolf makes use of its 6 cm (2+1⁄2 in) fangs and its powerful masseter muscles to deliver a bite force of 28 kg/cm2 (400 lbf/in2), which is capable of breaking open the skulls of many of its prey animals. The wolf leaps at its quarry and tears at it. One wolf was observed being dragged for dozens of metres attached to the hind leg of a moose; another was seen being dragged over a fallen log while attached to a bull elk's nose.[115] Wolves may wound large prey and then lie around resting for hours before killing it when it is weaker due to blood loss, thereby lessening the risk of injury to themselves.[121] With medium-sized prey, such as roe deer or sheep, wolves kill by biting the throat, severing nerve tracks and the carotid artery, thus causing the animal to die within a few seconds to a minute. With small, mouselike prey, wolves leap in a high arc and immobilize it with their forepaws.[122]
Once prey is brought down, wolves begin to feed excitedly, ripping and tugging at the carcass in all directions, and bolting down large chunks of it.[123] The breeding pair typically monopolizes food to continue producing pups. When food is scarce, this is done at the expense of other family members, especially non-pups.[124] The breeding pair typically eats first. They usually work the hardest at killing prey, and may rest after a long hunt and allow the rest of the family to eat undisturbed. Once the breeding pair has finished eating, the rest of the family tears off pieces of the carcass and transports them to secluded areas where they can eat in peace. Wolves typically commence feeding by gorging on the larger internal organs, like the heart, liver, lungs, and stomach lining. The kidneys and spleen are eaten once they are exposed, followed by the muscles.[125] A wolf can eat 15–19% of its body weight in one sitting.[61]

Infections
Viral and bacterial
 Footage of a wolf taken from Abruzzo Natural Park showing advanced signs of canine distemper
Viral diseases carried by wolves include: rabies, canine distemper, canine parvovirus, infectious canine hepatitis, papillomatosis, and canine coronavirus.[126] Wolves are a major host for rabies in Russia, Iran, Afghanistan, Iraq and India.[127] In wolves, the incubation period is eight to 21 days, and results in the host becoming agitated, deserting its pack, and travelling up to 80 km (50 mi) a day, thus increasing the risk of infecting other wolves. Infected wolves do not show any fear of humans, most documented wolf attacks on people being attributed to rabid animals. Although canine distemper is lethal in dogs, it has not been recorded to kill wolves, except in Canada and Alaska. The canine parvovirus, which causes death by dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, and endotoxic shock or sepsis, is largely survivable in wolves, but can be lethal to pups. Wolves may catch infectious canine hepatitis from dogs, though there are no records of wolves dying from it. Papillomatosis has been recorded only once in wolves, and likely does not cause serious illness or death, though it may alter feeding behaviours. The canine coronavirus has been recorded in Alaskan wolves, infections being most prevalent in winter months.[126]
Bacterial diseases carried by wolves include: brucellosis, Lyme disease, leptospirosis, tularemia, bovine tuberculosis,[128] listeriosis and anthrax.[127] Wolves can catch Brucella suis from wild and domestic reindeer. While adult wolves tend not to show any clinical signs, it can severely weaken the pups of infected females. Although lyme disease can debilitate individual wolves, it does not appear to significantly affect wolf populations. Leptospirosis can be contracted through contact with infected prey or urine, and can cause fever, anorexia, vomiting, anemia, hematuria, icterus, and death. Wolves living near farms are more vulnerable to the disease than those living in the wilderness, probably because of prolonged contact with infected domestic animal waste. Wolves may catch tularemia from lagomorph prey, though its effect on wolves is unknown. Although bovine tuberculosis is not considered a major threat to wolves, it has been recorded to have killed two wolf pups in Canada.[128]

Parasitic
 In Yellowstone National Park
Wolves carry ectoparasites and endoparasites; those in the former Soviet Union have been recorded to carry at least 50 species.[127] Most of these parasites infect wolves without adverse effects, though the effects may become more serious in sick or malnourished specimens.[129] Parasitic infection in wolves is of particular concern to people. Wolves can spread them to dogs, which in turn can carry the parasites to humans. In areas where wolves inhabit pastoral areas, the parasites can be spread to livestock.[127]
Wolves are often infested with a variety of arthropod exoparasites, including fleas, ticks, lice, and mites. The most harmful to wolves, particularly pups, is the mange mite (Sarcoptes scabiei),[129] though they rarely develop full-blown mange, unlike foxes.[35] Lice, such as Trichodectes canis, may cause sickness in wolves, but rarely death. Ticks of the genus Ixodes can infect wolves with Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever.[129] The tick Dermacentor pictus also infests wolves. Other ectoparasites include chewing lice, sucking lice and the fleas Pulex irritans and Ctenocephalides canis.[35]
Endoparasites known to infect wolves include: protozoans and helminths (flukes, tapeworms, roundworms and thorny-headed worms). Of 30,000 protozoan species, only a few have been recorded to infect wolves: Isospora, Toxoplasma, Sarcocystis, Babesia, and Giardia.[129] Some wolves carry Neospora caninum, which can be spread to cattle and is correlated with bovine miscarriages.[130] Among flukes, the most common in North American wolves is Alaria, which infects small rodents and amphibians which are eaten by wolves. Upon reaching maturity, Alaria migrates to the wolf's intestine, but does little harm. Metorchis conjunctus, which enters wolves through eating fish, infects the wolf's liver or gall bladder, causing liver disease, inflammation of the pancreas, and emaciation. Most other fluke species reside in the wolf's intestine, though Paragonimus westermani lives in the lungs. Tapeworms are commonly found in wolves, as their primary hosts are ungulates, small mammals, and fish, which wolves feed upon. Tapeworms generally cause little harm in wolves, though this depends on the number and size of the parasites, and the sensitivity of the host. Symptoms often include constipation, toxic and allergic reactions, irritation of the intestinal mucosa, and malnutrition. Infections by the tapeworm Echinococcus granulosus in ungulate populations tend to increase in areas with high wolf densities, as wolves can shed Echinoccocus eggs in their feces onto grazing areas.[129]
Wolves can carry over 30 roundworm species, though most roundworm infections appear benign, depending on the number of worms and the age of the host. Ancylostoma caninum attaches itself on the intestinal wall to feed on the host's blood, and can cause hyperchromic anemia, emaciation, diarrhea, and possibly death. Toxocara canis, a hookworm known to infect wolf pups in the uterus, can cause intestinal irritation, bloating, vomiting, and diarrhea. Wolves may catch Dioctophyma renale from minks, which infects the kidneys, and can grow to lengths of 100 cm (40 in). D. renale causes the complete destruction of the kidney's functional tissue and can be fatal if both kidneys are infected. Wolves can tolerate low levels of Dirofilaria immitis for many years without showing any ill effects, though high levels can kill wolves through cardiac enlargement and congestive hepatopathy. Wolves probably become infected with Trichinella spiralis by eating infected ungulates. Although T. spiralis is not known to produce clinical signs in wolves, it can cause emaciation, salivation, and crippling muscle pains in dogs. Thorny-headed worms rarely infect wolves, though three species have been identified in Russian wolves: Nicolla skrjabini, Macracanthorhynchus catulinus, and Moniliformis moniliformis.[129]

Status and conservation
Further information: List of gray wolf populations by country
The global wild wolf population in 2003 was estimated at 300,000.[131] Wolf population declines have been arrested since the 1970s. This has fostered recolonization and reintroduction in parts of its former range as a result of legal protection, changes in land use, and rural human population shifts to cities. Competition with humans for livestock and game species, concerns over the danger posed by wolves to people, and habitat fragmentation pose a continued threat to the wolf. Despite these threats, the IUCN classifies the wolf as Least Concern on its Red List due to its relatively widespread range and stable population. The species is listed under Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), meaning international trade in the species (including parts and derivatives) is regulated. However, populations of Bhutan, India, Nepal and Pakistan are listed in Appendix I which prohibits commercial international trade in wild-sourced specimens.[2]

North America
 Captive Mexican wolf at Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge in New Mexico, as part of reintroduction
In Canada, 50,000–60,000 wolves live in 80% of their historical range, making Canada an important stronghold for the species.[39] Under Canadian law, First Nations people can hunt wolves without restrictions, but others must acquire licenses for the hunting and trapping seasons. As many as 4,000 wolves may be harvested in Canada each year.[132] The wolf is a protected species in national parks under the Canada National Parks Act.[133] In Alaska, 7,000–11,000 wolves are found on 85% of the state's 1,517,733 km2 (586,000 sq mi) area. Wolves may be hunted or trapped with a license; around 1,200 wolves are harvested annually.[134]
In the contiguous United States, wolf declines were caused by the expansion of agriculture, the decimation of the wolf's main prey species like the American bison, and extermination campaigns.[39] Wolves were given protection under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973, and have since returned to parts of their former range thanks to both natural recolonizations and reintroductions in Yellowstone and Idaho.[135] The repopulation of wolves in Midwestern United States has been concentrated in the Great Lakes states of Minnesota, Wisconsin and Michigan where wolves number over 4,000 as of 2018.[136] Wolves also occupy much of the northern Rocky Mountains region, with at least 1,704 wolves in Montana, Idaho and Wyoming as of 2015. They have also established populations in Washington and Oregon.[137][138] In Mexico and parts of the southwestern United States, the Mexican and U.S. governments collaborated from 1977 to 1980 in capturing all Mexican wolves remaining in the wild to prevent their extinction and established captive breeding programs for reintroduction.[139]

Eurasia
 
Europe, excluding Russia, Belarus and Ukraine, has 17,000 wolves in more than 28 countries.[140] In many countries of the European Union, the wolf is strictly protected under the 1979 Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats (Appendix II) and the 1992 Council Directive 92/43/EEC on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild Fauna and Flora (Annex II and IV). There is extensive legal protection in many European countries, although there are national exceptions.[2][141]
Wolves have been persecuted in Europe for centuries, having been exterminated in Great Britain by 1684, in Ireland by 1770, in Central Europe by 1899, in France by the 1930s, and in much of Scandinavia by the early 1970s. They continued to survive in parts of Finland, Eastern Europe and Southern Europe.[142] Since 1980, European wolves have rebounded and expanded into parts of their former range. The decline of the traditional pastoral and rural economies seems to have ended the need to exterminate the wolf in parts of Europe.[132] As of 2016, estimates of wolf numbers include: 4,000 in the Balkans, 3,460–3,849 in the Carpathian Mountains, 1,700–2,240 in the Baltic states, 1,100–2,400 in the Italian peninsula, and around 2,500 in the northwest Iberian peninsula as of 2007.[140]
In the former Soviet Union, wolf populations have retained much of their historical range despite Soviet-era large scale extermination campaigns. Their numbers range from 1,500 in Georgia, to 20,000 in Kazakhstan and up to 45,000 in Russia.[143] In Russia, the wolf is regarded as a pest because of its attacks on livestock, and wolf management means controlling their numbers by destroying them throughout the year. Russian history over the past century shows that reduced hunting leads to an abundance of wolves.[144] The Russian government has continued to pay bounties for wolves and annual harvests of 20–30% do not appear to significantly affect their numbers.[145]

 A wolf in southern Israel
In the Middle East, only Israel and Oman give wolves explicit legal protection.[146] Israel has protected its wolves since 1954 and has maintained a moderately sized population of 150 through effective enforcement of conservation policies. These wolves have moved into neighboring countries. Approximately 300–600 wolves inhabit the Arabian Peninsula.[147] The wolf also appears to be widespread in Iran.[148] Turkey has an estimated population of about 7,000 wolves.[149] Outside of Turkey, wolf populations in the Middle East may total 1,000–2,000.[146]
In southern Asia, the northern regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan are important strongholds for wolves. The wolf has been protected in India since 1972.[150] The Indian wolf is distributed across the states of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.[151] As of 2019, it is estimated that there are around 2,000–3,000 Indian wolves in the country.[152] In East Asia, Mongolia's population numbers 10,000–20,000. In China, Heilongjiang has roughly 650 wolves, Xinjiang has 10,000 and Tibet has 2,000.[153] 2017 evidence suggests that wolves range across all of mainland China.[154] Wolves have been historically persecuted in China[155] but have been legally protected since 1998.[156] The last Japanese wolf was captured and killed in 1905.[157]

Relationships with humans
In culture
In folklore, religion and mythology
Main article: Wolves in folklore, religion and mythology
See also: Wolves in heraldry
 The Capitoline Wolf, sculpture of the mythical she-wolf feeding the twins Romulus and Remus, from the legend of the founding of Rome, Italy, 13th century AD. (The twins are a 15th-century addition.)
The wolf is a common motif in the mythologies and cosmologies of peoples throughout its historical range. The Ancient Greeks associated wolves with Apollo, the god of light and order.[158] The Ancient Romans connected the wolf with their god of war and agriculture Mars,[159] and believed their city's founders, Romulus and Remus, were suckled by a she-wolf.[160] Norse mythology includes the feared giant wolf Fenrir,[161] and Geri and Freki, Odin's faithful pets.[162]
In Chinese astronomy, the wolf represents Sirius and guards the heavenly gate. In China, the wolf was traditionally associated with greed and cruelty and wolf epithets were used to describe negative behaviours such as cruelty ("wolf's heart"), mistrust ("wolf's look") and lechery ("wolf-sex"). In both Hinduism and Buddhism, the wolf is ridden by gods of protection. In Vedic Hinduism, the wolf is a symbol of the night and the daytime quail must escape from its jaws. In Tantric Buddhism, wolves are depicted as inhabitants of graveyards and destroyers of corpses.[161]
In the Pawnee creation myth, the wolf was the first animal brought to Earth. When humans killed it, they were punished with death, destruction and the loss of immortality.[163] For the Pawnee, Sirius is the "wolf star" and its disappearance and reappearance signified the wolf moving to and from the spirit world. Both Pawnee and Blackfoot call the Milky Way the "wolf trail".[164] The  wolf is also an important crest symbol for clans of the Pacific Northwest like the Kwakwakaʼwakw.[161]
The concept of people turning into wolves, and the inverse, has been present in many cultures. One Greek myth tells of Lycaon being transformed into a wolf by Zeus as punishment for his evil deeds.[165] The legend of the werewolf has been widespread in European folklore and involves people willingly turning into wolves to attack and kill others.[166] The Navajo have traditionally believed that witches would turn into wolves by donning wolf skins and would kill people and raid graveyards.[167] The Dena'ina believed wolves were once men and viewed them as brothers.[158]

In fable and literature
See also: List of fictional wolves
Aesop featured wolves in several of his fables, playing on the concerns of Ancient Greece's settled, sheep-herding world. His most famous is the fable of "The Boy Who Cried Wolf", which is directed at those who knowingly raise false alarms, and from which the idiomatic phrase "to cry wolf" is derived. Some of his other fables concentrate on maintaining the trust between shepherds and guard dogs in their vigilance against wolves, as well as anxieties over the close relationship between wolves and dogs. Although Aesop used wolves to warn, criticize and moralize about human behaviour, his portrayals added to the wolf's image as a deceitful and dangerous animal. The Bible uses an image of a wolf lying with a lamb in a utopian vision of the future. In the New Testament, Jesus is said to have used wolves as illustrations of the dangers his followers, whom he represents as sheep, would face should they follow him.[168]

 Little Red Riding Hood (1883), Gustave Doré
Isengrim the wolf, a character first appearing in the 12th-century Latin poem Ysengrimus, is a major character in the Reynard Cycle, where he stands for the low nobility, whilst his adversary, Reynard the fox, represents the peasant hero. Isengrim is forever the victim of Reynard's wit and cruelty, often dying at the end of each story.[169] The tale of "Little Red Riding Hood", first written in 1697 by Charles Perrault, is considered to have further contributed to the wolf's negative reputation in the Western world. The Big Bad Wolf is portrayed as a villain capable of imitating human speech and disguising itself with human clothing. The character has been interpreted as an allegorical sexual predator.[170] Villainous wolf characters also appear in The Three Little Pigs and "The Wolf and the Seven Young Goats".[171] The hunting of wolves, and their attacks on humans and livestock, feature prominently in Russian literature, and are included in the works of Leo Tolstoy, Anton Chekhov, Nikolay Nekrasov, Ivan Bunin, Leonid Pavlovich Sabaneyev, and others. Tolstoy's War and Peace and Chekhov's Peasants both feature scenes in which wolves are hunted with hounds and Borzois.[172] The musical Peter and the Wolf involves a wolf being captured for eating a duck, but is spared and sent to a zoo.[173]
Wolves are among the central characters of Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book. His portrayal of wolves has been praised posthumously by wolf biologists for his depiction of them: rather than being villainous or gluttonous, as was common in wolf portrayals at the time of the book's publication, they are shown as living in amiable family groups and drawing on the experience of infirm but experienced elder pack members.[174] Farley Mowat's largely fictional 1963 memoir Never Cry Wolf is widely considered to be the most popular book on wolves, having been adapted into a Hollywood film and taught in several schools decades after its publication. Although credited with having changed popular perceptions on wolves by portraying them as loving, cooperative and noble, it has been criticized for its idealization of wolves and its factual inaccuracies.[175][176][177]

Conflicts
Human presence appears to stress wolves, as seen by increased cortisol levels in instances such as snowmobiling near their territory.[178]

Predation on livestock
 A 1905 postcard of the Hexham wolf, an escaped wolf shot for killing livestock in England
Livestock depredation has been one of the primary reasons for hunting wolves and can pose a severe problem for wolf conservation. As well as causing economic losses, the threat of wolf predation causes great stress on livestock producers, and no foolproof solution of preventing such attacks short of exterminating wolves has been found.[179] Some nations help offset economic losses to wolves through compensation programs or state insurance.[180] Domesticated animals are easy prey for wolves, as they have been bred under constant human protection, and are thus unable to defend themselves very well.[181] Wolves typically resort to attacking livestock when wild prey is depleted.[182] In Eurasia, a large part of the diet of some wolf populations consists of livestock, while such incidents are rare in North America, where healthy populations of wild prey have been largely restored.[179]
The majority of losses occur during the summer grazing period, untended livestock in remote pastures being the most vulnerable to wolf predation.[183] The most frequently targeted livestock species are sheep (Europe), domestic reindeer (northern Scandinavia), goats (India), horses (Mongolia), cattle and turkeys (North America).[179] The number of animals killed in single attacks varies according to species: most attacks on cattle and horses result in one death, while turkeys, sheep and domestic reindeer may be killed in surplus.[184] Wolves mainly attack livestock when the animals are grazing, though they occasionally break into fenced enclosures.[185]

Competition with dogs
A review of the studies on the competitive effects of dogs on sympatric carnivores did not mention any research on competition between dogs and wolves.[186][187] Competition would favour the wolf, which is known to kill dogs; however, wolves usually live in pairs or in small packs in areas with high human persecution, giving them a disadvantage when facing large groups of dogs.[187][188]
Wolves kill dogs on occasion, and some wolf populations rely on dogs as an important food source. In Croatia, wolves kill more dogs than sheep, and wolves in Russia appear to limit stray dog populations. Wolves may display unusually bold behaviour when attacking dogs accompanied by people, sometimes ignoring nearby humans. Wolf attacks on dogs may occur both in house yards and in forests. Wolf attacks on hunting dogs are considered a major problem in Scandinavia and Wisconsin.[179][189] The most frequently killed hunting breeds in Scandinavia are Harriers, older animals being most at risk, likely because they are less timid than younger animals, and react to the presence of wolves differently. Large hunting dogs such as Swedish Elkhounds are more likely to survive wolf attacks because of their better ability to defend themselves.[189]
Although the number of dogs killed each year by wolves is relatively low, it induces a fear of wolves entering villages and farmyards to prey on them. In many cultures, dogs are seen as family members, or at least working team members, and losing one can lead to strong emotional responses such as demanding more liberal hunting regulations.[187]
Dogs that are employed to guard sheep help to mitigate human–wolf conflicts, and are often proposed as one of the non-lethal tools in the conservation of wolves.[187][190] Shepherd dogs are not particularly aggressive, but they can disrupt potential wolf predation by displaying what is to the wolf ambiguous behaviours, such as barking, social greeting, invitation to play or aggression. The historical use of shepherd dogs across Eurasia has been effective against wolf predation,[187][191] especially when confining sheep in the presence of several livestock guardian dogs.[187][192] Shepherd dogs are sometimes killed by wolves.[187]

Attacks on humans
Main articles: Wolf attack and List of wolf attacks
 Country children surprised by a wolf (1833) by François Grenier de Saint-Martin
The fear of wolves has been pervasive in many societies, though humans are not part of the wolf's natural prey.[193] How wolves react to humans depends largely on their prior experience with people: wolves lacking any negative experience of humans, or which are food-conditioned, may show little fear of people.[194] Although wolves may react aggressively when provoked, such attacks are mostly limited to quick bites on extremities, and the attacks are not pressed.[193]
Predatory attacks may be preceded by a long period of habituation, in which wolves gradually lose their fear of humans. The victims are repeatedly bitten on the head and face, and are then dragged off and consumed unless the wolves are driven off. Such attacks typically occur only locally and do not stop until the wolves involved are eliminated. Predatory attacks can occur at any time of the year, with a peak in the June–August period, when the chances of people entering forested areas (for livestock grazing or berry and mushroom picking) increase.[193] Cases of non-rabid wolf attacks in winter have been recorded in Belarus, Kirov and Irkutsk oblasts, Karelia and Ukraine. Also, wolves with pups experience greater food stresses during this period.[35] The majority of victims of predatory wolf attacks are children under the age of 18 and, in the rare cases where adults are killed, the victims are almost always women.[193] Indian wolves have a history of preying on children, a phenomenon called "child-lifting". They may be taken primarily in the spring and summer periods during the evening hours, and often within human settlements.[195]
Cases of rabid wolves are low when compared to other species, as wolves do not serve as primary reservoirs of the disease, but can be infected by animals such as dogs, jackals and foxes. Incidents of rabies in wolves are very rare in North America, though numerous in the eastern Mediterranean, the Middle East and Central Asia. Wolves apparently develop the "furious" phase of rabies to a very high degree. This, coupled with their size and strength, makes rabid wolves perhaps the most dangerous of rabid animals.[193] Bites from rabid wolves are 15 times more dangerous than those of rabid dogs.[196] Rabid wolves usually act alone, travelling large distances and often biting large numbers of people and domestic animals. Most rabid wolf attacks occur in the spring and autumn periods. Unlike with predatory attacks, the victims of rabid wolves are not eaten, and the attacks generally occur only on a single day. The victims are chosen at random, though most cases involve adult men. During the fifty years up to 2002, there were eight fatal attacks in Europe and Russia, and more than two hundred in southern Asia.[193]

Human hunting of wolves
Main articles: Wolf hunting and Wolf hunting with dogs
See also: Human uses of hunted wolves
 Carcasses of hunted wolves in Volgograd Oblast, Russia
Theodore Roosevelt said wolves are difficult to hunt because of their elusiveness, sharp senses, high endurance, and ability to quickly incapacitate and kill a dog.[197] Historic methods included killing of spring-born litters in their dens, coursing with dogs (usually combinations of sighthounds, Bloodhounds and Fox Terriers), poisoning with strychnine, and trapping.[198][199]
A popular method of wolf hunting in Russia involves trapping a pack within a small area by encircling it with fladry poles carrying a human scent. This method relies heavily on the wolf's fear of human scents, though it can lose its effectiveness when wolves become accustomed to the odor. Some hunters can lure wolves by imitating their calls. In Kazakhstan and Mongolia, wolves are traditionally hunted with eagles and falcons, though this practice is declining, as experienced falconers are becoming few in number. Shooting wolves from aircraft is highly effective, due to increased visibility and direct lines of fire.[199] Several types of dog, including the Borzoi and Kyrgyz Tajgan, have been specifically bred for wolf hunting.[187]

As pets and working animals
Main article: Wolves as pets and working animals
Wolves and wolf-dog hybrids are sometimes kept as exotic pets. Although closely related to domestic dogs, wolves do not show the same tractability as dogs in living alongside humans, being generally less responsive to human commands and more likely to act aggressively. A person is more likely to be fatally mauled by a pet wolf or wolf-dog hybrid than by a dog.[200]

Notes


^ Populations of Bhutan, India, Nepal, and Pakistan are included in Appendix I. Excludes domesticated form and dingo, which are referenced as Canus lupus familiaris and Canus lupus dingo.

^ Domestic and feral dogs are included in the phylogenetic but not colloquial definition of 'wolf', and thus not in the scope of this article.


References


^ Tedford, Richard H.; Wang, Xiaoming; Taylor, Beryl E. (2009). "Phylogenetic Systematics of the North American Fossil Caninae (Carnivora: Canidae)". Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. 325: 1–218. doi:10.1206/574.1. hdl:2246/5999. S2CID 83594819.

^ a b c d e Boitani, L.; Phillips, M.; Jhala, Y. (2018). "Canis lupus". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2018: e.T3746A163508960. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2018-2.RLTS.T3746A163508960.en. Retrieved November 19, 2021.

^ "Appendices | CITES". cites.org. Retrieved January 14, 2022.

^ a b c Linnæus, Carl (1758). "Canis Lupus". Systema naturæ per regna tria naturæ, secundum classes, ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis. Tomus I (in Latin) (10 ed.). Holmiæ (Stockholm): Laurentius Salvius. pp. 39–40.

^ Harper, Douglas. "wolf". Online Etymology Dictionary.

^ A. Lehrman (1987). "Anatolian Cognates of the PIE Word for 'Wolf'". Die Sprache. 33: 13–18.

^ Young, Stanley P.; Goldman, Edward A. (1944). The Wolves of North America, Part I. New York, Dover Publications, Inc. p. 390.

^ Marvin 2012, pp. 74–75.

^ Koepfli, Klaus-Peter; Pollinger, John; Godinho, Raquel; Robinson, Jacqueline; Lea, Amanda; Hendricks, Sarah; Schweizer, Rena M.; Thalmann, Olaf; Silva, Pedro; Fan, Zhenxin; Yurchenko, Andrey A.; Dobrynin, Pavel; Makunin, Alexey; Cahill, James A.; Shapiro, Beth; Álvares, Francisco; Brito, José C.; Geffen, Eli; Leonard, Jennifer A.; Helgen, Kristofer M.; Johnson, Warren E.; o'Brien, Stephen J.; Van Valkenburgh, Blaire; Wayne, Robert K. (2015). "Genome-wide Evidence Reveals that African and Eurasian Golden Jackals Are Distinct Species". Current Biology. 25 (#16): 2158–65. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.06.060. PMID 26234211.

^ Harper, Douglas. "canine". Online Etymology Dictionary.

^ Clutton-Brock, Juliet (1995). "2-Origins of the dog".  In Serpell, James (ed.). The Domestic Dog: Its Evolution, Behaviour and Interactions with People. Cambridge University Press. pp. 7–20. ISBN 0521415292.

^ Wozencraft, W. C. (2005). "Order Carnivora".  In Wilson, D. E.; Reeder, D. M. (eds.). Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (3rd ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 575–577. ISBN 978-0-8018-8221-0. OCLC 62265494.

^ Larson, G.; Bradley, D. G. (2014). "How Much Is That in Dog Years? The Advent of Canine Population Genomics". PLOS Genetics. 10 (1): e1004093. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1004093. PMC 3894154. PMID 24453989.

^ Alvares, Francisco; Bogdanowicz, Wieslaw; Campbell, Liz A.D.; Godinho, Rachel; Hatlauf, Jennifer; Jhala, Yadvendradev V.; Kitchener, Andrew C.; Koepfli, Klaus-Peter; Krofel, Miha; Moehlman, Patricia D.; Senn, Helen; Sillero-Zubiri, Claudio; Viranta, Suvi; Werhahn, Geraldine (2019). "Old World Canis spp. with taxonomic ambiguity: Workshop conclusions and recommendations. CIBIO. Vairão, Portugal, 28–30 May 2019" (PDF). IUCN/SSC Canid Specialist Group. Retrieved March 6, 2020.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 239–245.

^ a b c Thalmann, Olaf; Perri, Angela R. (2018). "Paleogenomic Inferences of Dog Domestication".  In Lindqvist, C.; Rajora, O. (eds.). Paleogenomics. Population Genomics. Springer, Cham. pp. 273–306. doi:10.1007/13836_2018_27. ISBN 978-3-030-04752-8.

^ a b Freedman, Adam H.; Gronau, Ilan; Schweizer, Rena M.; Ortega-Del Vecchyo, Diego; Han, Eunjung;  et al. (2014). "Genome Sequencing Highlights the Dynamic Early History of Dogs". PLOS Genetics. 10 (1). e1004016. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1004016. PMC 3894170. PMID 24453982.

^ Skoglund, Pontus; Ersmark, Erik; Palkopoulou, Eleftheria; Dalén, Love (2015). "Ancient Wolf Genome Reveals an Early Divergence of Domestic Dog Ancestors and Admixture into High-Latitude Breeds". Current Biology. 25 (11): 1515–1519. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.04.019. PMID 26004765.

^ a b c Fan, Zhenxin; Silva, Pedro; Gronau, Ilan; Wang, Shuoguo; Armero, Aitor Serres; Schweizer, Rena M.; Ramirez, Oscar; Pollinger, John; Galaverni, Marco; Ortega Del-Vecchyo, Diego; Du, Lianming; Zhang, Wenping; Zhang, Zhihe; Xing, Jinchuan; Vilà, Carles; Marques-Bonet, Tomas; Godinho, Raquel; Yue, Bisong; Wayne, Robert K. (2016). "Worldwide patterns of genomic variation and admixture in gray wolves". Genome Research. 26 (2): 163–173. doi:10.1101/gr.197517.115. PMC 4728369. PMID 26680994.

^ Hennelly, Lauren M.; Habib, Bilal; Modi, Shrushti; Rueness, Eli K.; Gaubert, Philippe; Sacks, Benjamin N. (2021). "Ancient divergence of Indian and Tibetan wolves revealed by recombination‐aware phylogenomics". Molecular Ecology. 30 (24): 6687–6700. doi:10.1111/mec.16127. PMID 34398980. S2CID 237147842.

^ Werhahn, Geraldine; Senn, Helen; Ghazali, Muhammad; Karmacharya, Dibesh; Sherchan, Adarsh Man; Joshi, Jyoti; Kusi, Naresh; López-Bao, José Vincente; Rosen, Tanya; Kachel, Shannon; Sillero-Zubiri, Claudio; MacDonald, David W. (2018). "The unique genetic adaptation of the Himalayan wolf to high-altitudes and consequences for conservation". Global Ecology and Conservation. 16: e00455. doi:10.1016/j.gecco.2018.e00455.

^ Koblmüller, Stephan; Vilà, Carles; Lorente-Galdos, Belen; Dabad, Marc; Ramirez, Oscar; Marques-Bonet, Tomas; Wayne, Robert K.; Leonard, Jennifer A. (2016). "Whole mitochondrial genomes illuminate ancient intercontinental dispersals of grey wolves (Canis lupus)". Journal of Biogeography. 43 (9): 1728–1738. doi:10.1111/jbi.12765. hdl:10261/153364. S2CID 88740690.

^ Freedman, Adam H; Wayne, Robert K (2017). "Deciphering the Origin of Dogs: From Fossils to Genomes". Annual Review of Animal Biosciences. 5: 281–307. doi:10.1146/annurev-animal-022114-110937. PMID 27912242.

^ a b Gopalakrishnan, Shyam; Sinding, Mikkel-Holger S.; Ramos-Madrigal, Jazmín; Niemann, Jonas; Samaniego Castruita, Jose A.; Vieira, Filipe G.; Carøe, Christian; Montero, Marc de Manuel; Kuderna, Lukas; Serres, Aitor; González-Basallote, Víctor Manuel; Liu, Yan-Hu; Wang, Guo-Dong; Marques-Bonet, Tomas; Mirarab, Siavash; Fernandes, Carlos; Gaubert, Philippe; Koepfli, Klaus-Peter; Budd, Jane; Rueness, Eli Knispel; Heide-Jørgensen, Mads Peter; Petersen, Bent; Sicheritz-Ponten, Thomas; Bachmann, Lutz; Wiig, Øystein; Hansen, Anders J.; Gilbert, M. Thomas P. (2018). "Interspecific Gene Flow Shaped the Evolution of the Genus Canis". Current Biology. 28 (21): 3441–3449.e5. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.08.041. PMC 6224481. PMID 30344120.

^ a b Sinding, Mikkel-Holger S.; Gopalakrishan, Shyam; Vieira, Filipe G.; Samaniego Castruita, Jose A.; Raundrup, Katrine; Heide Jørgensen, Mads Peter; Meldgaard, Morten; Petersen, Bent; Sicheritz-Ponten, Thomas; Mikkelsen, Johan Brus; Marquard-Petersen, Ulf; Dietz, Rune; Sonne, Christian; Dalén, Love; Bachmann, Lutz; Wiig, Øystein; Hansen, Anders J.; Gilbert, M. Thomas P. (2018). "Population genomics of grey wolves and wolf-like canids in North America". PLOS Genetics. 14 (11): e1007745. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007745. PMC 6231604. PMID 30419012.

^ Wang, Guo-Dong; Zhang, Ming; Wang, Xuan; Yang, Melinda A.; Cao, Peng; Liu, Feng; Lu, Heng; Feng, Xiaotian; Skoglund, Pontus; Wang, Lu; Fu, Qiaomei; Zhang, Ya-Ping (2019). "Genomic Approaches Reveal an Endemic Subpopulation of Gray Wolves in Southern China". iScience. 20: 110–118. Bibcode:2019iSci...20..110W. doi:10.1016/j.isci.2019.09.008. PMC 6817678. PMID 31563851.

^ Iacolina, Laura; Scandura, Massimo; Gazzola, Andrea; Cappai, Nadia; Capitani, Claudia; Mattioli, Luca; Vercillo, Francesca; Apollonio, Marco (2010). "Y-chromosome microsatellite variation in Italian wolves: A contribution to the study of wolf-dog hybridization patterns". Mammalian Biology—Zeitschrift für Säugetierkunde. 75 (4): 341–347. doi:10.1016/j.mambio.2010.02.004.

^ a b Kopaliani, N.; Shakarashvili, M.; Gurielidze, Z.; Qurkhuli, T.; Tarkhnishvili, D. (2014). "Gene Flow between Wolf and Shepherd Dog Populations in Georgia (Caucasus)". Journal of Heredity. 105 (3): 345–53. doi:10.1093/jhered/esu014. PMID 24622972.

^ Moura, A. E.; Tsingarska, E.; Dąbrowski, M. J.; Czarnomska, S. D.; Jędrzejewska, B. A.; Pilot, M. G. (2013). "Unregulated hunting and genetic recovery from a severe population decline: The cautionary case of Bulgarian wolves". Conservation Genetics. 15 (2): 405–417. doi:10.1007/s10592-013-0547-y.

^ Bergström, Anders; Frantz, Laurent; Schmidt, Ryan; Ersmark, Erik; Lebrasseur, Ophelie; Girdland-Flink, Linus; Lin, Audrey T.; Storå, Jan; Sjögren, Karl-Göran; Anthony, David; Antipina, Ekaterina; Amiri, Sarieh; Bar-Oz, Guy; Bazaliiskii, Vladimir I.; Bulatović, Jelena; Brown, Dorcas; Carmagnini, Alberto; Davy, Tom; Fedorov, Sergey; Fiore, Ivana; Fulton, Deirdre; Germonpré, Mietje; Haile, James; Irving-Pease, Evan K.; Jamieson, Alexandra; Janssens, Luc; Kirillova, Irina; Horwitz, Liora Kolska; Kuzmanovic-Cvetković, Julka; Kuzmin, Yaroslav; Losey, Robert J.; Dizdar, Daria Ložnjak; Mashkour, Marjan; Novak, Mario; Onar, Vedat; Orton, David; Pasaric, Maja; Radivojevic, Miljana; Rajkovic, Dragana; Roberts, Benjamin; Ryan, Hannah; Sablin, Mikhail; Shidlovskiy, Fedor; Stojanovic, Ivana; Tagliacozzo, Antonio; Trantalidou, Katerina; Ullén, Inga; Villaluenga, Aritza; Wapnish, Paula; Dobney, Keith; Götherström, Anders; Linderholm, Anna; Dalén, Love; Pinhasi, Ron; Larson, Greger; Skoglund, Pontus (2020). "Origins and genetic legacy of prehistoric dogs". Science. 370 (6516): 557–564. doi:10.1126/science.aba9572. PMC 7116352. PMID 33122379. S2CID 225956269.

^ a b Mech, L. David (1974). "Canis lupus". Mammalian Species (37): 1–6. doi:10.2307/3503924. JSTOR 3503924. Archived from the original on July 31, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019.

^ Heptner & Naumov 1998, pp. 129–132.

^ a b Heptner & Naumov 1998, p. 166.

^ Mech 1981, p. 13.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Heptner & Naumov 1998, pp. 164–270.

^ Mech 1981, p. 14.

^ Therrien, F. O. (2005). "Mandibular force profiles of extant carnivorans and implications for the feeding behaviour of extinct predators". Journal of Zoology. 267 (3): 249–270. doi:10.1017/S0952836905007430.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 112.

^ a b c d e f g h Paquet, P.; Carbyn, L. W. (2003). "Ch23: Gray wolf Canis lupus and allies".  In Feldhamer, G. A.; Thompson, B. C.; Chapman, J. A. (eds.). Wild Mammals of North America: Biology, Management, and Conservation (2 ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 482–510. ISBN 0-8018-7416-5.

^ a b Lopez 1978, p. 23.

^ a b Heptner & Naumov 1998, p. 174.

^ a b Miklosi, A. (2015). "Ch. 5.5.2—Wolves". Dog Behaviour, Evolution, and Cognition (2 ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 110–112. ISBN 978-0-19-104572-1.

^ Macdonald, D. W.; Norris, S. (2001). Encyclopedia of Mammals. Oxford University Press. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-7607-1969-5.

^ a b c Lopez 1978, p. 19.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 18.

^ Lopez 1978, pp. 19–20.

^ a b Gipson, Philip S.; Bangs, Edward E.; Bailey, Theodore N.; Boyd, Diane K.; Cluff, H. Dean; Smith, Douglas W.; Jiminez, Michael D. (2002). "Color Patterns among Wolves in Western North America". Wildlife Society Bulletin. 30 (3): 821–830. JSTOR 3784236.

^ Heptner & Naumov 1998, pp. 168–169.

^ Heptner & Naumov 1998, p. 168.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 22.

^ Anderson, T. M.; Vonholdt, B. M.; Candille, S. I.; Musiani, M.; Greco, C.; Stahler, D. R.; Smith, D. W.; Padhukasahasram, B.; Randi, E.; Leonard, J. A.; Bustamante, C. D.; Ostrander, E. A.; Tang, H.; Wayne, R. K.; Barsh, G. S. (2009). "Molecular and Evolutionary History of Melanism in North American Gray Wolves". Science. 323 (5919): 1339–1343. Bibcode:2009Sci...323.1339A. doi:10.1126/science.1165448. PMC 2903542. PMID 19197024.

^ Hedrick, P. W. (2009). "Wolf of a different colour". Heredity. 103 (6): 435–436. doi:10.1038/hdy.2009.77. PMID 19603061. S2CID 5228987.

^ Earle, M (1987). "A flexible body mass in social carnivores". American Naturalist. 129 (5): 755–760. doi:10.1086/284670. S2CID 85236511.

^ Sorkin, Boris (2008). "A biomechanical constraint on body mass in terrestrial mammalian predators". Lethaia. 41 (4): 333–347. doi:10.1111/j.1502-3931.2007.00091.x.

^ Mech, L. David (1966). The Wolves of Isle Royale. Fauna Series 7. Fauna of the National Parks of the United States. pp. 75–76. ISBN 978-1-4102-0249-9.

^ a b Newsome, Thomas M.; Boitani, Luigi; Chapron, Guillaume; Ciucci, Paolo; Dickman, Christopher R.; Dellinger, Justin A.; López-Bao, José V.; Peterson, Rolf O.; Shores, Carolyn R.; Wirsing, Aaron J.; Ripple, William J. (2016). "Food habits of the world's grey wolves". Mammal Review. 46 (4): 255–269. doi:10.1111/mam.12067. S2CID 31174275.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 107.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 109–110.

^ a b Dewey, Tanya; Smith, Julia. "Canis lupus (gray wolf)". Animal Diversity Web. University of Michigan, Museum of Zoology. Retrieved June 16, 2022.

^ Mech 1981, p. 172.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 201.

^ a b c d Heptner & Naumov 1998, pp. 213–231.

^ Gable, T. D.; Windels, S. K.; Homkes, A. T. (2018). "Do wolves hunt freshwater fish in spring as a food source?". Mammalian Biology. 91: 30–33. doi:10.1016/j.mambio.2018.03.007. S2CID 91073874.

^ Woodford, Riley (November 2004). "Alaska's Salmon-Eating Wolves". Wildlifenews.alaska.gov. Retrieved July 25, 2019.

^ McAllister, I. (2007). The Last Wild Wolves: Ghosts of the Rain Forest. University of California Press. p. 144. ISBN 978-0520254732.

^ Fuller, T. K. (2019). "Ch3-What wolves eat". Wolves: Spirit of the Wild. Chartwell Crestline. p. 53. ISBN 978-0785837381.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 109.

^ Mech 1981, p. 180.

^ Klein, D. R. (1995). "The introduction, increase, and demise of wolves on Coronation Island, Alaska".  In Carbyn, L. N.; Fritts, S. H.; Seip, D. R. (eds.). Ecology and conservation of wolves in a changing world. Canadian Circumpolar Institute, Occasional Publication No. 35. pp. 275–280.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 266–268.

^ Merrit, Dixon (January 7, 1921). "World's Greatest Animal Dead" (PDF). US Department of Agriculture Division of Publications. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2019.

^ Giannatos, G. (April 2004). "Conservation Action Plan for the golden jackal Canis aureus L. in Greece" (PDF). World Wildlife Fund Greece. pp. 1–47. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 9, 2017. Retrieved October 29, 2019.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 269.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 261–263.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 263–264.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 266.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 265.

^ Sunquist, Melvin E.; Sunquist, Fiona (2002). Wild cats of the world. University of Chicago Press. p. 167. ISBN 0-226-77999-8.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 264–265.

^ Jimenez, Michael D.; Asher, Valpa J.; Bergman, Carita; Bangs, Edward E.; Woodruff, Susannah P. (2008). "Gray Wolves, Canis lupus, Killed by Cougars, Puma concolor, and a Grizzly Bear, Ursus arctos, in Montana, Alberta, and Wyoming". The Canadian Field-Naturalist. 122: 76. doi:10.22621/cfn.v122i1.550.

^ Elbroch, L. M.; Lendrum, P. E.; Newsby, J.; Quigley, H.; Thompson, D. J. (2015). "Recolonizing wolves influence the realized niche of resident cougars". Zoological Studies. 54 (41): e41. doi:10.1186/s40555-015-0122-y. PMC 6661435. PMID 31966128.

^ Miquelle, D. G.; Stephens, P. A.; Smirnov, E. N.; Goodrich, J. M.; Zaumyslova, O. J.; Myslenkov, A. E. (2005). "Tigers and Wolves in the Russian Far East: Competitive Exclusion, Functional Redundancy and Conservation Implications".  In Ray, J. C.; Berger, J.; Redford, K. H.; Steneck, R. (eds.). Large Carnivores and the Conservation of Biodiversity. Island Press. pp. 179–207. ISBN 1-55963-080-9. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2015.

^ Monchot, H.; Mashkour, H. (2010). "Hyenas around the cities. The case of Kaftarkhoun (Kashan- Iran)". Journal of Taphonomy. 8 (1): 17–32..

^ Mills, M. G. L.; Mills, Gus; Hofer, Heribert (1998). Hyaenas: status survey and conservation action plan. IUCN. pp. 24–25. ISBN 978-2-8317-0442-5. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2015.

^ Nayak, S.; Shah, S.; Borah, J. (2015). "Going for the kill: an observation of wolf-hyaena interaction in Kailadevi Wildlife Sanctuary, Rajasthan, India". Canid Biology & Conservation. 18 (7): 27–29.

^ Dinets, Vladimir; Eligulashvili, Beniamin (2016). "Striped Hyaenas (Hyaena hyaena) in Grey Wolf (Canis lupus) packs: Cooperation, commensalism or singular aberration?". Zoology in the Middle East. 62: 85–87. doi:10.1080/09397140.2016.1144292. S2CID 85957777.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 164.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 2–3, 28.

^ Molnar, B.; Fattebert, J.; Palme, R.; Ciucci, P.; Betschart, B.; Smith, D. W.; Diehl, P. (2015). "Environmental and intrinsic correlates of stress in free-ranging wolves". PLOS ONE. 10 (9). e0137378. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1037378M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0137378. PMC 4580640. PMID 26398784.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 1–2.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 12–13.

^ Nowak, R. M.; Paradiso, J. L. (1983). "Carnivora;Canidae". Walker's Mammals of the World. Vol. 2 (4th ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 953. ISBN 9780801825255.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 38.

^ a b Jędrzejewski, W. O.; Schmidt, K.; Theuerkauf, J. R.; Jędrzejewska, B. A.; Kowalczyk, R. (2007). "Territory size of wolves Canis lupus: Linking local (Białowieża Primeval Forest, Poland) and Holarctic-scale patterns". Ecography. 30: 66–76. doi:10.1111/j.0906-7590.2007.04826.x. S2CID 62800394.

^ a b c Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 19–26.

^ Mech, L. D. (1977). "Wolf-Pack Buffer Zones as Prey Reservoirs". Science. 198 (4314): 320–321. Bibcode:1977Sci...198..320M. doi:10.1126/science.198.4314.320. PMID 17770508. S2CID 22125487. Archived from the original on July 24, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2019.

^ Mech, L. David; Adams, L. G.; Meier, T. J.; Burch, J. W.; Dale, B. W. (2003). "Ch.8-The Denali Wolf-Prey System". The Wolves of Denali. University of Minnesota Press. p. 163. ISBN 0-8166-2959-5.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 66–103.

^ Busch 2007, p. 59.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 38.

^ Lopez 1978, pp. 39–41.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 90.

^ Peters, R. P.; Mech, L. D. (1975). "Scent-marking in wolves". American Scientist. 63 (6): 628–637. Bibcode:1975AmSci..63..628P. PMID 1200478.

^ a b c Heptner & Naumov 1998, p. 248.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 5.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 175.

^ Heptner & Naumov 1998, pp. 234–238.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 42–46.

^ a b Heptner & Naumov 1998, pp. 249–254.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 47.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 46–49.

^ Fox, M. W. (1978). The Dog: Its Domestication and Behavior. Garland STPM. p. 33. ISBN 978-0894642029.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 119–121.

^ a b Thurber, J. M.; Peterson, R. O. (1993). "Effects of Population Density and Pack Size on the Foraging Ecology of Gray Wolves". Journal of Mammalogy. 74 (4): 879–889. doi:10.2307/1382426. JSTOR 1382426. S2CID 52063038.

^ a b Mech, Smith & MacNulty 2015, p. 4.

^ Heptner & Naumov 1998, p. 233.

^ Heptner & Naumov 1998, p. 240.

^ MacNulty, Daniel; Mech, L. David; Smith, Douglas W. (2007). "A proposed ethogram of large-carnivore predatory behavior, exemplified by the wolf". Journal of Mammalogy. 88 (3): 595–605. doi:10.1644/06-MAMM-A-119R1.1.

^ a b Mech, Smith & MacNulty 2015, pp. 1–3.

^ Mech, Smith & MacNulty 2015, p. 7.

^ Mech, Smith & MacNulty 2015, p. 82–89.

^ Zimen, Erik (1981). The Wolf: His Place in the Natural World. Souvenir Press. pp. 217–218. ISBN 978-0-285-62411-5.

^ Mech 1981, p. 185.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 58.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 122–125.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 208–211.

^ a b c d Graves 2007, pp. 77–85.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 211–213.

^ a b c d e f Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 202–208.

^ Dubey, J. P.; Jenkins, M. C.; Rajendran, C.; Miska, K.; Ferreira, L. R.; Martins, J.; Kwok, O. C. H.; Choudhary, S. (2011). "Gray wolf (Canis lupus) is a natural definitive host for Neospora caninum". Veterinary Parasitology. 181 (2–4): 382–387. doi:10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.05.018. PMID 21640485.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 230.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 321–324.

^ Government of Canada (July 29, 2019). "Schedule 3 (section 26) Protected Species". Justice Laws Website. Archived from the original on April 9, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2019.

^ State of Alaska (October 29, 2019). "Wolf Hunting in Alaska". Alaska Department of Fish and Game. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2019.

^ "Wolf Recovery under the Endangered Species Act" (PDF). US Fish and Wildlife Service. February 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 3, 2019. Retrieved September 1, 2019.

^ "Wolf Numbers in Minnesota, Wisconsin and Michigan (excluding Isle Royale)—1976 to 2015". U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Retrieved March 23, 2020.

^ "Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Program 2015 Interagency Annual Report" (PDF). US Fish and Wildlife Service. April 18, 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2019.

^ Fimrite, Peter (May 9, 2018). "Wolves in Northern California aren't just loping through anymore; they're here to stay". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved August 3, 2018.

^ Nie, M. A. (2003). Beyond Wolves: The Politics of Wolf Recovery and Management. University of Minnesota Press. pp. 118–119. ISBN 0816639787.

^ a b "Status of large carnivore populations in Europe 2012–2016". European Commission. Archived from the original on September 2, 2019. Retrieved September 2, 2019.

^ European Commission: Status, management and distribution of large carnivores—bear, lynx, wolf & wolverine—in Europe December 2012. page 50.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 318–320.

^ Goldthorpe, Gareth (2016). The wolf in Eurasia—a regional approach to the conservation and management of a top-predator in Central Asia and the South Caucasus. Fauna & Flora International. doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.10128.20480.

^ Baskin, Leonid (2016). "Hunting as Sustainable Wildlife Management". Mammal Study. 41 (4): 173–180. doi:10.3106/041.041.0402.

^ "The Wolf in Russia—situations and problems" (PDF). Wolves and Humans Foundation. Retrieved September 2, 2019.

^ a b Fisher, A. (January 29, 2019). "Conservation in conflict: Advancement and the Arabian wolf". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on November 7, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2019.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 323, 327.

^ Busch 2007, p. 231.

^ Şekercioğlu, Çağan (December 15, 2013). "Turkey's Wolves Are Texting Their Travels to Scientists". National Geographic. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved November 19, 2019.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 327.

^ Yadvendradev, V. Jhala; Giles, Robert H. Jr. (991). "The Status and Conservation of the Wolf in Gujarat and Rajasthan, India". Conservation Biology. Wiley. 5 (4): 476–483. doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.1991.tb00354.x. JSTOR 2386069.

^ Sharma, Lalit Kumar; Mukherjee, Tanoy; Saren, Phakir Chandra; Chandra, Kailash (2019). "Identifying suitable habitat and corridors for Indian Grey Wolf (Canis lupus pallipes) in Chotta Nagpur Plateau and Lower Gangetic Planes: A species with differential management needs". PLOS ONE. 14 (4): e0215019. Bibcode:2019PLoSO..1415019S. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0215019. PMC 6457547. PMID 30969994.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 328.

^ Larson, Greger (2017). "Reconsidering the distribution of gray wolves". Zoological Research. 38 (3): 115–116. doi:10.24272/j.issn.2095-8137.2017.021. PMC 5460078. PMID 28585433.

^ Busch 2007, p. 232.

^ Xu, Yu; Yang, Biao; Dou, Liang (2015). "Local villagers' perceptions of wolves in Jiuzhaigou County, western China". PeerJ. 3: e982. doi:10.7717/peerj.982. PMC 4465947. PMID 26082870.

^ Ishiguro, Naotaka; Inoshima, Yasuo; Shigehara, Nobuo (2009). "Mitochondrial DNA Analysis of the Japanese Wolf (Canis Lupus Hodophilax Temminck, 1839) and Comparison with Representative Wolf and Domestic Dog Haplotypes". Zoological Science. 26 (11): 765–70. doi:10.2108/zsj.26.765. PMID 19877836. S2CID 27005517.

^ a b Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 292.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 210.

^ Marvin 2012, p. 128.

^ a b c Werness, Hope, B. (2007). The Continuum Encyclopedia of Animal Symbolism in World Art. Continuum International Publishing Group. pp. 405, 437. ISBN 978-0826419132.

^ Marvin 2012, p. 78.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 133.

^ Busch 2007, p. 110.

^ Marvin 2012, p. 47.

^ Marvin 2012, p. 50.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 123.

^ Marvin 2012, pp. 38–45.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 259.

^ Marvin 2012, pp. 64–70.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 263.

^ Graves 2007, pp. 21, 123.

^ Marvin 2012, p. 162.

^ Cassidy, K; Smith, D. W.; Mech, L. D.; MacNulty, D. R.; Stahler, D. R.; Metz, M. C. (2006). "Territoriality and interpack aggression in wolves: Shaping a social carnivore's life history. Rudyard Kipling's Law of the Jungle Meets Yellowstone's Law of the Mountains". Yellowstone Science. 24 (1): 37–41.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 294.

^ Jones, K. (2001). "Never Cry Wolf: Science, Sentiment, and the Literary Rehabilitation of Canis Lupus". The Canadian Historical Review. 84. Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved July 28, 2012.

^ Grooms, Steve (2008). "The Mixed Legacy of Never Cry Wolf" (PDF). International Wolf. 18 (3): 11–13. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 21, 2010.

^ Creel, S.; Fox, J. E.; Hardy, A.; Sands, J.; Garrott, B.; Peterson, R. O. (2002). "Snowmobile activity and glucocorticoid stress responses in wolves and elk". Conservation Biology. 16 (3): 809–814. doi:10.1046/j.1523-1739.2002.00554.x. S2CID 84878446.

^ a b c d Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 305.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 309.

^ Mech 1981, p. 173.

^ Levy, Max G. (December 11, 2020). "These Non-Lethal Methods Encouraged by Science Can Keep Wolves From Killing Livestock". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved December 16, 2020.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 307.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, p. 306.

^ Graves 2007, p. 45.

^ Vanak, A. T.; Dickman, C. R.; Silva-Rodriguez, E. A.; Butler, J. R. A.; Ritchie, E. G. (2014). "Top-dogs and under-dogs: competition between dogs and sympatric carnivores".  In Gompper, M. E. (ed.). Free-Ranging Dogs and Wildlife Conservation. Oxford University Press. pp. 69–93. ISBN 978-0199663217.

^ a b c d e f g h Lescureux, Nicolas; Linnell, John D. C. (2014). "Warring brothers: The complex interactions between wolves (Canis lupus) and dogs (Canis familiaris) in a conservation context". Biological Conservation. 171: 232–245. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2014.01.032.

^ Boitani, L. (1983). "Wolf and dog competition in Italy". Acta Zoologica Fennica (174): 259–264.

^ a b Backeryd, J. (2007). "Wolf attacks on dogs in Scandinavia 1995–2005—Will wolves in Scandinavia go extinct if dog owners are allowed to kill a wolf attacking a dog?" (PDF). Examensarbete, Institutionen för ekologi, Grimsö forskningsstation. Sveriges Lantbruksuniversitet. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 17, 2019. Retrieved July 17, 2019.

^ Shivik, John A. (2006). "Tools for the Edge: What's New for Conserving Carnivores". BioScience. 56 (3): 253. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2006)056[0253:TFTEWN]2.0.CO;2.

^ Coppinger, R.; Schneider, R. (1995). "Evolution of working dogs".  In Serpell, J. (ed.). The Domestic Dog: Its Evolution, Behaviour and Interactions With People. University Press, Cambridge. pp. 21–47. ISBN 9780521425377.

^ Espuno, Nathalie; Lequette, Benoit; Poulle, Marie-Lazarine; Migot, Pierre; Lebreton, Jean-Dominique (2004). "Heterogeneous response to preventive sheep husbandry during wolf recolonization of the French Alps". Wildlife Society Bulletin. 32 (4): 1195–1208. doi:10.2193/0091-7648(2004)032[1195:HRTPSH]2.0.CO;2. S2CID 86058778.

^ a b c d e f Linnell, J. D. C. (2002). The Fear of Wolves: A Review of Wolf Attacks on Humans (PDF). Norsk Institutt for Naturforskning (NINA). ISBN 978-82-426-1292-2. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved August 16, 2013.

^ Mech & Boitani 2003, pp. 300–304.

^ Rajpurohit, K.S. (1999). "Child lifting: Wolves in Hazaribagh, India". Ambio. 28: 162–166.

^ Heptner & Naumov 1998, p. 267.

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1909). Hunting the grisly and other sketches; an account of the big game of the United States and its chase with horse, hound, and rifle. G. P. Putnam's sons. pp. 179–207. Archived from the original on June 24, 2015. Retrieved May 14, 2014.

^ Lopez 1978, p. 108.

^ a b Graves 2007, pp. 121–140.

^ Tucker, P.; Weide, B. (1998). "Can You Turn a Wolf into a Dog" (PDF). Wild Sentry. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 8, 2015. Retrieved March 21, 2016.


Bibliography
Busch, R. H. (2007). Wolf Almanac, New and Revised: A Celebration Of Wolves And Their World (3 ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-59921-069-8.
Graves, Will (2007). Wolves in Russia: Anxiety throughout the ages. Detselig Enterprises. ISBN 978-1-55059-332-7.
Heptner, V. G.; Naumov, N. P. (1998). Mammals of the Soviet Union Vol. II Part 1a, Sirenia and Carnivora (Sea cows; Wolves and Bears). Science Publishers, Inc. USA. ISBN 978-1-886106-81-9.
Lopez, Barry H. (1978). Of Wolves and Men. J. M. Dent and Sons Limited. ISBN 978-0-7432-4936-2.
Marvin, Garry (2012). Wolf. Reaktion Books Ltd. ISBN 978-1-86189-879-1.
Mech, L. David (1981). The Wolf: The Ecology and Behaviour of an Endangered Species. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-1026-6.
Mech, L. David; Boitani, Luigi, eds. (2003). Wolves: Behaviour, Ecology and Conservation. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-51696-7.
Mech, L. David; Smith, Douglas W.; MacNulty, Daniel R. (2015). Wolves on the Hunt: The Behavior of Wolves Hunting Wild Prey. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-25514-9.
External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Canis lupus.




Wikispecies has information related to Canis lupus.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Wolf.

The International Wolf Center
Staying Safe in Wolf Country, ADFG (January 2009)
Watch Death of a Legend and Cry of the Wild by Bill Mason
vteExtant gray wolf subspecies
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Chordata
Class: Mammalia
Order: Carnivora
Family: Canidae
Genus: Canis
Species: lupus
Old Worldsubspecies
Tundra wolf (C. l. albus)
Arabian wolf (C. l. arabs)
Steppe wolf (C. l. campestris)
Mongolian wolf (C. l. chanco)
Himalayan wolf (C. l. chanco)
Dingo (C. l. dingo)
Domestic dog (C. l. familiaris or C. familiaris)
Eurasian wolf (C. l. lupus)
Indian wolf (C. l. pallipes)
New Worldsubspecies
Arctic wolf (C. l. arctos)
Mexican wolf (C. l. baileyi)
British Columbian wolf (C. l. columbianus)
Vancouver Coastal Sea wolf (C. l. crassodon)
Hudson Bay wolf (C. l. hudsonicus)
Northern Rocky Mountain wolf (C. l. irremotus)
Labrador wolf (C. l. labradorius)
Alexander Archipelago wolf (C. l. ligoni)
Eastern wolf (C. l. lycaon)
Mackenzie River wolf (C. l. mackenzii)
Baffin Island wolf (C. l. manningi)
Northwestern wolf (C. l. occidentalis)
Greenland wolf (C. l. orion)
Alaskan Interior wolf (C. l. pambasileus)
Red wolf (C. l. rufus)
Alaskan tundra wolf (C. l. tundrarum)

vteExtant Carnivora species
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Chordata
Class: Mammalia
Infraclass: Eutheria
Superorder: Laurasiatheria
Suborder FeliformiaNandiniidaeNandinia
African palm civet (N. binotata)
Herpestidae(Mongooses)Atilax
Marsh mongoose (A. paludinosus)
Bdeogale
Bushy-tailed mongoose (B. crassicauda)
Jackson's mongoose (B. jacksoni)
Black-footed mongoose (B. nigripes)
Crossarchus
Alexander's kusimanse (C. alexandri)
Angolan kusimanse (C. ansorgei)
Common kusimanse (C. obscurus)
Flat-headed kusimanse (C. platycephalus)
Cynictis
Yellow mongoose (C. penicillata)
Dologale
Pousargues's mongoose (D. dybowskii)
Helogale
Ethiopian dwarf mongoose (H. hirtula)
Common dwarf mongoose (H. parvula)
Herpestes
Angolan slender mongoose (H. flavescens)
Egyptian mongoose (H. ichneumon)
Somalian slender mongoose (H. ochracea)
Cape gray mongoose (H. pulverulenta)
Common slender mongoose (H. sanguinea)
Ichneumia
White-tailed mongoose (I. albicauda)
Liberiictus
Liberian mongoose (L. kuhni)
Mungos
Gambian mongoose (M. gambianus)
Banded mongoose (M. mungo)
Paracynictis
Selous's mongoose (P. selousi)
Rhynchogale
Meller's mongoose (R. melleri)
Suricata
Meerkat (S. suricatta)
Urva
Small Indian mongoose (U. auropunctata)
Short-tailed mongoose (U. brachyura)
Indian grey mongoose (U. edwardsii)
Indian brown mongoose (U. fusca)
Javan mongoose (U. javanica)
Collared mongoose (U. semitorquata)
Ruddy mongoose (U. smithii)
Crab-eating mongoose (U. urva)
Stripe-necked mongoose (U. vitticolla)
Xenogale
Long-nosed mongoose (X. naso)
Hyaenidae(Hyenas)Crocuta
Spotted hyena (C. crocuta)
Hyaena
Striped hyena (H. hyaena)
Parahyaena
Brown hyena (P. brunnea)
Proteles
Aardwolf (P. cristata)
FelidaeLarge family listed belowViverridaeLarge family listed belowEupleridaeSmall family listed belowFamily FelidaeFelinaeAcinonyx
Cheetah (A. jubatus)
Caracal
African golden cat (C. aurata)
Caracal (C. caracal)
Catopuma
Bay cat (C. badia)
Asian golden cat (C. temminckii)
Felis
Chinese mountain cat (F. bieti)
Domestic cat (F. catus)
Jungle cat (F. chaus)
African wildcat (F. lybica)
Sand cat (F. margarita)
Black-footed cat (F. nigripes)
European wildcat (F. silvestris)
Herpailurus
Jaguarundi (H. yagouaroundi)
Leopardus
Pantanal cat (L. braccatus)
Pampas cat (L. colocola)
Eastern oncilla (L. emiliae)
Northern colocolo (L. garleppi)
Geoffroy's cat (L. geoffroyi)
Kodkod (L. guigna)
Southern tiger cat (L. guttulus)
Andean mountain cat (L. jacobita)
Muñoa's colocolo (L. munoai)
Southern colocolo (L. pajeros)
Ocelot (L. pardalis)
Oncilla (L. tigrinus)
Margay (L. wiedii)
Leptailurus
Serval (L. serval)
Lynx
Canada lynx (L. canadensis)
Eurasian lynx (L. lynx)
Iberian lynx (L. pardinus)
Bobcat (L. rufus)
Otocolobus
Pallas's cat (O. manul)
Pardofelis
Marbled cat (P. marmorata)
Prionailurus
Leopard cat (P. bengalensis)
Sunda leopard cat  (P. javanensis)
Flat-headed cat (P. planiceps)
Rusty-spotted cat (P. rubiginosus)
Fishing cat (P. viverrinus)
Puma
Cougar (P. concolor)
PantherinaePanthera
Lion (P. leo)
Jaguar (P. onca)
Leopard (P. pardus)
Tiger (P. tigris)
Snow leopard (P. uncia)
Neofelis
Sunda clouded leopard (N. diardi)
Clouded leopard (N. nebulosa)
PrionodontidaePrionodon
Banded linsang (P. linsang)
Spotted linsang (P. pardicolor)
Family ViverridaeParadoxurinaeArctictis
Binturong (A. binturong)
Arctogalidia
Small-toothed palm civet (A. trivirgata)
Macrogalidia
Sulawesi palm civet (M. musschenbroekii)
Paguma
Masked palm civet (P. larvata)
Paradoxurus
Asian palm civet (P. hermaphroditus)
Brown palm civet (P. jerdoni)
Golden palm civet (P. zeylonensis)
HemigalinaeChrotogale
Owston's palm civet (C. owstoni)
Cynogale
Otter civet (C. bennettii)
Diplogale
Hose's palm civet (D. hosei)
Hemigalus
Banded palm civet (H. derbyanus)
ViverrinaeCivettictis
African civet (C. civetta)
Viverra
Malabar large-spotted civet (V. civettina)
Large-spotted civet (V. megaspila)
Malayan civet (V. tangalunga)
Large Indian civet (V. zibetha)
Viverricula
Small Indian civet (V. indica)
GenettinaeGenetta(Genets)
Abyssinian genet (G. abyssinica)
Angolan genet (G. angolensis)
Bourlon's genet (G. bourloni)
Crested servaline genet (G. cristata)
Common genet (G. genetta)
Johnston's genet (G. johnstoni)
Letaba genet (G. letabae)
Rusty-spotted genet (G. maculata)
Pardine genet (G. pardina)
Aquatic genet (G. piscivora)
King genet (G. poensis)
Servaline genet (G. servalina)
Hausa genet (G. thierryi)
Cape genet (G. tigrina)
Giant forest genet (G. victoriae)
Poiana
Central African oyan (P. richardsonii)
West African oyan (P. leightoni)
Family EupleridaeEuplerinaeCryptoprocta
Fossa (C. ferox)
Eupleres
Eastern falanouc (E. goudotii)
Western falanouc (E. major)
Fossa
Malagasy civet (F. fossana)
GalidiinaeGalidia
Ring-tailed vontsira (G. elegans)
Galidictis
Broad-striped Malagasy mongoose (G. fasciata)
Grandidier's mongoose (G. grandidieri)
Mungotictis
Narrow-striped mongoose (M. decemlineata)
Salanoia
Brown-tailed mongoose (S. concolor)
Durrell's vontsira (S. durrelli)
Suborder Caniformia (cont. below)Ursidae(Bears)Ailuropoda
Giant panda (A. melanoleuca)
Helarctos
Sun bear (H. malayanus)
Melursus
Sloth bear (M. ursinus)
Tremarctos
Spectacled bear (T. ornatus)
Ursus
American black bear (U. americanus)
Brown bear (U. arctos)
Polar bear (U. maritimus)
Asian black bear (U. thibetanus)
Mephitidae(Skunks)Conepatus(Hog-nosedskunks)
Molina's hog-nosed skunk (C. chinga)
American hog-nosed skunk (C. leuconotus)
Striped hog-nosed skunk (C. semistriatus)
Mephitis
Hooded skunk (M. macroura)
Striped skunk (M. mephitis)
Mydaus
Sunda stink badger (M. javanensis)
Palawan stink badger (M. marchei)
Spilogale(Spotted skunks)
Southern spotted skunk (S. angustifrons)
Western spotted skunk (S. gracilis)
Eastern spotted skunk (S. putorius)
Pygmy spotted skunk (S. pygmaea)
Procyonidae(Raccoons, coatis, olingos)Bassaricyon(Olingos)
Eastern lowland olingo (B. alleni)
Northern olingo (B. gabbii)
Western lowland olingo (B. medius)
Olinguito (B. neblina)
Bassariscus
Ringtail (B. astutus)
Cacomistle (B. sumichrasti)
Nasua(Coatis inclusive)
White-nosed coati (N. narica)
South American coati (N. nasua)
Nasuella(Coatis inclusive)
Western mountain coati (N. olivacea)
Potos
Kinkajou (P. flavus)
Procyon
Crab-eating raccoon (P. cancrivorus)
Raccoon (P. lotor)
Cozumel raccoon (P. pygmaeus)
AiluridaeAilurus
Red panda (A. fulgens)
Suborder Caniformia (cont. above)Otariidae(Eared seals)(includes fur sealsand sea lions)(Pinniped inclusive)Arctocephalus
South American fur seal (A. australis)
Australasian fur seal (A. forsteri)
Galápagos fur seal (A. galapagoensis)
Antarctic fur seal (A. gazella)
Juan Fernández fur seal (A. philippii)
Brown fur seal (A. pusillus)
Guadalupe fur seal (A. townsendi)
Subantarctic fur seal (A. tropicalis)
Callorhinus
Northern fur seal (C. ursinus)
Eumetopias
Steller sea lion (E. jubatus)
Neophoca
Australian sea lion (N. cinerea)
Otaria
South American sea lion (O. flavescens)
Phocarctos
New Zealand sea lion (P. hookeri)
Zalophus
California sea lion (Z. californianus)
Galápagos sea lion (Z. wollebaeki)
Odobenidae(Pinniped inclusive)Odobenus
Walrus (O. rosmarus)
Phocidae(Earless seals)(Pinniped inclusive)Cystophora
Hooded seal (C. cristata)
Erignathus
Bearded seal (E. barbatus)
Halichoerus
Grey seal (H. grypus)
Histriophoca
Ribbon seal (H. fasciata)
Hydrurga
Leopard seal (H. leptonyx)
Leptonychotes
Weddell seal (L. weddellii)
Lobodon
Crabeater seal (L. carcinophagus)
Mirounga(Elephant seals)
Northern elephant seal (M. angustirostris)
Southern elephant seal (M. leonina)
Monachus
Mediterranean monk seal (M. monachus)
Neomonachus
Hawaiian monk seal (N. schauinslandi)
Ommatophoca
Ross seal (O. rossi)
Pagophilus
Harp seal (P. groenlandicus)
Phoca
Spotted seal (P. largha)
Harbor seal (P. vitulina)
Pusa
Caspian seal (P. caspica)
Ringed seal (P. hispida)
Baikal seal (P. sibirica)
CanidaeLarge family listed belowMustelidaeLarge family listed belowFamily Canidae (includes dogs)Atelocynus
Short-eared dog (A. microtis)
Canis
Golden jackal (C. aureus)
Domestic dog (C. familiaris)
Coyote (C. latrans)
African wolf (C. lupaster)
Wolf (C. lupus)
Eastern wolf (C. lycaon)
Red wolf (C. rufus)
Ethiopian wolf (C. simensis)
Cerdocyon
Crab-eating fox (C. thous)
Chrysocyon
Maned wolf (C. brachyurus)
Cuon
Dhole (C. alpinus)
Lupulella
Side-striped jackal (L. adustus)
Black-backed jackal (L. mesomelas)
Lycalopex
Culpeo (L. culpaeus)
Darwin's fox (L. fulvipes)
South American gray fox (L. griseus)
Pampas fox (L. gymnocercus)
Sechuran fox (L. sechurae)
Hoary fox (L. vetulus)
Lycaon
African wild dog (L. pictus)
Nyctereutes
Common raccoon dog (N. procyonoides)
Japanese raccoon dog (N. viverrinus)
Otocyon
Bat-eared fox (O. megalotis)
Speothos
Bush dog (S. venaticus)
Urocyon
Gray fox (U. cinereoargenteus)
Island fox (U. littoralis)
Vulpes (Foxes)
Bengal fox (V. bengalensis)
Blanford's fox (V. cana)
Cape fox (V. chama)
Corsac fox (V. corsac)
Tibetan fox (V. ferrilata)
Arctic fox (V. lagopus)
Kit fox (V. macrotis)
Pale fox (V. pallida)
Rüppell's fox (V. rueppelli)
Swift fox (V. velox)
Red fox (V. vulpes)
Fennec fox (V. zerda)
Family MustelidaeHelictidinae(Ferret-badgers)Melogale
Bornean ferret badger (M. everetti)
Chinese ferret-badger (M. moschata)
Javan ferret-badger (M. orientalis)
Burmese ferret-badger (M. personata)
Vietnam ferret-badger (M. cucphuongensis)
Guloninae(Martens and wolverines)Eira
Tayra (E. barbara)
Gulo
Wolverine (G. gulo)
Martes(Martens)
American marten (M. americana)
Pacific marten (M. caurina)
Yellow-throated marten (M. flavigula)
Beech marten (M. foina)
Nilgiri marten (M. gwatkinsii)
European pine marten (M. martes)
Japanese marten (M. melampus)
Sable (M. zibellina)
Pekania
Fisher (P. pennanti)
Ictonychinae(African polecats and grisons)Galictis
Lesser grison (G. cuja)
Greater grison (G. vittata)
Ictonyx
Saharan striped polecat (I. libyca)
Striped polecat (I. striatus)
Lyncodon
Patagonian weasel (L. patagonicus)
Poecilogale
African striped weasel (P. albinucha)
Vormela
Marbled polecat (V. peregusna)
Lutrinae(Otters)Aonyx
African clawless otter (A. capensis)
Asian small-clawed otter (A. cinereus)
Congo clawless otter (A. congicus)
Enhydra
Sea otter (E. lutris)
Hydrictis
Spotted-necked otter (H. maculicollis)
Lontra
North American river otter (L. canadensis)
Marine otter (L. felina)
Neotropical otter (L. longicaudis)
Southern river otter (L. provocax)
Lutra
Eurasian otter (L. lutra)
Hairy-nosed otter (L. sumatrana)
Lutrogale
Smooth-coated otter (L. perspicillata)
Pteronura
Giant otter (P. brasiliensis)
Melinae(Eurasian badgers)Arctonyx
Northern hog badger (A. albogularis)
Greater hog badger (A. collaris)
Sumatran hog badger (A. hoevenii)
Meles
Japanese badger (M. anakuma)
Caucasian badger (M. canescens)
Asian badger (M. leucurus)
European badger (M. meles)
MellivorinaeMellivora
Honey badger (M. capensis)
Mustelinae(Weasels and minks)Mustela(Weasels and ferrets)
Mountain weasel (M. altaica)
Stoat/Beringian ermine (M. erminea)
Steppe polecat (M. eversmannii)
Ferret (M. furo)
Haida ermine (M. haidarum)
Japanese weasel (M. itatsi)
Yellow-bellied weasel (M. kathiah)
European mink (M. lutreola)
Indonesian mountain weasel (M. lutreolina)
Black-footed ferret (M. nigripes)
Least weasel (M. nivalis)
Malayan weasel (M. nudipes)
European polecat (M. putorius)
American ermine (M. richardsonii)
Siberian weasel (M. sibirica)
Back-striped weasel (M. strigidorsa)
Neogale
Amazon weasel (N. africana)
Colombian weasel (N. felipei)
Long-tailed weasel (N. frenata)
American mink (N. vison)
TaxidiinaeTaxidea
American badger (T. taxus)

vteMammal hybrids
Kingdom Animalia
Phylum Chordata
Class Mammalia
Bovidae
Bovid hybrid
American Breed
Beefalo
Dwarf Lulu
Dzo
Sheep–goat hybrid
Yakalo
Żubroń
Camelidae
Cama
Bukht
Huarizo
Canidae
Canid hybrid
Coydog
Coywolf
Dingo–dog hybrid
Eastern coyote
Jackal–dog hybrid
Sulimov dog
Wolfdog
Cetacea
Clymene dolphin
Wholphin
Narluga
Elephantidae
Elephant hybrid
Equus
Equid hybrid
Hinny
Kunga
Lord Morton's mare
Mule
Zebroid
Felidae
Felid hybrid
Bengal cat
Blynx
Caraval
Chausie
Highlander
Kellas
Pumapard
Savannah
Serengeti
Panthera hybrid
Dogla
Leoger
Leoliguar
Leopon
Leopliguar
Leguar
Liger
Liguar
Lipard
Liliger
Litigon
Lijagulep
Marozi
Tigon
Tiguar
Tigard
Tiliger
Titigon
Jagger
Jaglion
Jagupard
Hominidae
Humanzee
Hybrid orangutan
Koolakamba
Macropodinae
Macropod hybrids
Sus
Iron Age pig
Mustela
Polecat–ferret hybrid
Polecat–mink hybrid
Ursus
Ursid hybrid
ABC Islands bear
Grizzly–black bear hybrid
Grizzly–polar bear hybrid

Taxon identifiers
Wikidata: Q18498
Wikispecies: Canis lupus
ADW: Canis_lupus
ARKive: canis-lupus
BioLib: 1857
BOLD: 12514
CoL: QLXL
ECOS: 4488
EoL: 328607
EPPO: CANILU
EUNIS: 1367
Fauna Europaea: 305289
Fauna Europaea (new): 3610bdd7-7432-4d43-9f6e-6684deb82987
FEIS: calu
Fossilworks: 44860
GBIF: 5219173
GISD: 146
iNaturalist: 42048
IRMNG: 11407661
ITIS: 180596
IUCN: 3746
MSW: 14000738
NatureServe: 2.105212
NBN: NBNSYS0000005184
NCBI: 9612
NZOR: 309809e8-1a21-45a0-80a0-1f13fee46c52
Species+: 4442
TSA: 3356
ZooBank: 2F15C6CE-6C7A-4AF8-AE71-087151318E0E

Authority control: National libraries 
Spain
France (data)
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic







Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wolf&oldid=1115625271"
Categories: IUCN Red List least concern speciesApex predatorsMammals of AsiaMammals of EuropeMammals of North AmericaExtant Middle Pleistocene first appearancesHolarctic faunaMammals described in 1758Paraphyletic groupsPleistocene carnivoransScavengersTaxa named by Carl LinnaeusWolvesHidden categories: CS1 Latin-language sources (la)CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertaintyArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from December 2019Use Canadian English from December 2019All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian EnglishArticles with 'species' microformatsArticles containing Proto-Germanic-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsCommons category link is on WikidataTaxonbars with 25–29 taxon IDsArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersFeatured articlesArticles containing video clips



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadView sourceView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikispeciesWikiquote




Languages


АдыгэбзэАдыгабзэAfrikaansAlemannischАлтай тилአማርኛAnarâškielâÆngliscАԥсшәаالعربيةAragonésArmãneashtiArpetanAsturianuAtikamekwAvañe'ẽАварAzərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)Bikol CentralБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaChiShonaCorsuCymraegDanskDavvisámegiellaDeutschDiné bizaadEestiΕλληνικάEmiliàn e rumagnòlЭрзяньEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGàidhligGalegoГӀалгӀайگیلکی𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitutIñupiatunИронÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛKalaallisutქართულიकॉशुर / کٲشُرKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekКомиKotavaKreyòl ayisyenKurdîКыргызчаКырык марыLadinLadinoЛаккуລາວLatgaļuLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschЛезгиLietuviųLigureLimburgsLingua Franca NovaLivvinkarjalaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიمصرىဘာသာ မန်مازِرونیBahasa MelayuMìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄МокшеньМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNederlandsNedersaksiesNēhiyawēwin / ᓀᐦᐃᔭᐍᐏᐣनेपाली日本語NapulitanoНохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNouormandOccitanОлык марийOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوПерем комиPicardPiemontèisPolskiΠοντιακάPortuguêsRomânăRumantschRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСловѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟŚlůnskiSoomaaligaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்TaqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaไทยТоҷикӣᏣᎳᎩTsetsêhestâheseTürkçeТыва дылУдмуртУкраїнськаاردوVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtVõroWalonWinarayWolof吴语ייִדיש粵語ZazakiŽemaitėška中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 12 October 2022, at 11:07 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement






















wolf | Species & Facts | Britannica








































Browse




Search




                    Dictionary

                    Quizzes

                    Money










   Subscribe


Login








Entertainment & Pop Culture
Geography & Travel
Health & Medicine
Lifestyles & Social Issues
Literature
Philosophy & Religion
Politics, Law & Government
Science
Sports & Recreation
Technology
Visual Arts
World History


On This Day in History
Quizzes
Podcasts
Dictionary
Biographies
Summaries
Top Questions
Week In Review
Infographics
Demystified
Lists
#WTFact
Companions
Image Galleries
Spotlight
The Forum
One Good Fact


Entertainment & Pop Culture
Geography & Travel
Health & Medicine
Lifestyles & Social Issues
Literature
Philosophy & Religion
Politics, Law & Government
Science
Sports & Recreation
Technology
Visual Arts
World History


Britannica ClassicsCheck out these retro videos from Encyclopedia Britannica’s archives.
Britannica ExplainsIn these videos, Britannica explains a variety of topics and answers frequently asked questions.
Demystified VideosIn Demystified, Britannica has all the answers to your burning questions.
#WTFact VideosIn #WTFact Britannica shares some of the most bizarre facts we can find.
This Time in HistoryIn these videos, find out what happened this month (or any month!) in history.


Student PortalBritannica is the ultimate student resource for key school subjects like history, government, literature, and more.
COVID-19 PortalWhile this global health crisis continues to evolve, it can be useful to look to past pandemics to better understand how to respond today.
100 WomenBritannica celebrates the centennial of the Nineteenth Amendment, highlighting suffragists and history-making politicians.
Britannica BeyondWe’ve created a new place where questions are at the center of learning. Go ahead. Ask. We won’t mind.
Saving EarthBritannica Presents Earth’s To-Do List for the 21st Century. Learn about the major environmental problems facing our planet and what can be done about them!
SpaceNext50Britannica presents SpaceNext50,  From the race to the Moon to space stewardship, we explore a wide range of subjects that feed our curiosity about space!

















                    wolf
                





	
				Table of Contents
			







                        wolf
                    










Introduction & Top QuestionsGray wolfOther wolves


Fast Facts



                                                        2-Min Summary
                                                    



                                                        Related Content
                                                    



                                                        Quizzes
                                                    




Media



                                                        Videos
                                                    



                                                        Images
                                                    



                                                        Audio
                                                    




More



                                                        More Articles On This Topic
                                                    



                                                        Additional Reading
                                                    



                                                        Contributors
                                                    



                                                        Article History
                                                    



















Home


Science


Mammals


Dogs & the Canine Family






wolf
mammal




	
    
        Actions
        




	
						
						Cite
        



verifiedCite
		

			While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
			Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
		
Select Citation Style

MLA
APA
Chicago Manual of Style






Copy Citation







	
            
            Share
        




	
            Share
        
Share to social media

Facebook
Twitter

URL
https://www.britannica.com/animal/wolf






	
                    Give Feedback
                




	
                    External Websites
                





			Feedback
		


				Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login).
			

Feedback Type

Select a type (Required)
Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction
Link Correction
Additional Information
Other


Your Feedback

Submit Feedback


Thank you for your feedback
Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.

				Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
			






                External Websites
            


IndiaNetzone - Wolf, Indian Wild Animal
Live Science - Wolf Facts: Gray Wolves, Timber Wolves & Red Wolves


Britannica Websites
Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students.

wolf - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11)
wolf - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up)








	
    
                    Print
        



print
			Print
		

			Please select which sections you would like to print:
		



Table Of Contents








	
    
            Cite
        



verifiedCite
		

			While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
			Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
		
Select Citation Style

MLA
APA
Chicago Manual of Style






Copy Citation





	
    
            Share
        




	
            Share
        
Share to social media

Facebook
Twitter

URL
https://www.britannica.com/animal/wolf




	
    
            Feedback
        






	
                    External Websites
                




			Feedback
		


				Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login).
			

Feedback Type

Select a type (Required)
Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction
Link Correction
Additional Information
Other


Your Feedback

Submit Feedback


Thank you for your feedback
Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.

				Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
			






                    External Websites
                


IndiaNetzone - Wolf, Indian Wild Animal
Live Science - Wolf Facts: Gray Wolves, Timber Wolves & Red Wolves


Britannica Websites
Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students.

wolf - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11)
wolf - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up)





By

			Steven H. Fritts



					Last Updated: 


































Sep 5, 2022

Edit History





	
				Table of Contents
			
















									gray wolf 













See all media



Related Topics:

gray wolf
dire wolf
red wolf
Falkland Islands wolf
Ethiopian wolf


					...(Show more)





				See all related content →


Top QuestionsWhat are the different types of wolves?In addition to the well-known gray wolf (Canis lupus), other types of wolves include the red wolf; the eastern wolf; the Ethiopian, or Abyssinian, wolf; the extinct Falkland Islands, or Antarctic, wolf; and the extinct dire wolf.How many wolves are there in a pack?Wolves can live in packs of up to two dozen individuals, but groups numbering 6 to 10 are most common. A pack is a family group consisting of an adult breeding pair (the alpha male and alpha female) and their offspring of various ages.How big is a wolf pack's territory?A wolf pack’s territory can be 80 to 3,000 square km (31 to 1,200 square miles), depending on prey abundance. A wolf pack strongly defends its territory against neighboring packs.What is the lifespan of a wolf?Wolves can live up to 13 years in the wild, but most die long before that age. While diseases and parasites can affect wolves, in most areas of the world humans are the leading cause of death for wolves. In areas of high wolf density and declining prey populations, the major causes of death are killing by other wolves and starvation.How are wolves related to dogs?Wolves (Canis lupus) were first domesticated in northern Eurasia sometime between 14,000 and 29,000 years ago, and selective breeding produced dogs (Canis lupus familiaris).Summary


            Read a brief summary of this topic
        





Observe a brown bear protecting its cache of food from  wolvesSee all videos for this articlewolf,  any of two species of wild doglike carnivores. The gray, or timber, wolf (Canis lupus) is the better known. It is the largest nondomestic member of the dog family (Canidae) and inhabits vast areas of the Northern Hemisphere. The Ethiopian, or Abyssinian, wolf (C. simensis) inhabits the highlands of Ethiopia; until recently it was considered a jackal.  Gray wolf Learn how wolves, musk deer, and ravens adapt and survive the harsh Siberian wintersSee all videos for this articlePervasive in mythology, folklore, and language, the gray wolf has had an impact on the human imagination and has been the victim of levels of misunderstanding that few animals have shared. With the exception of humans and the lion, the gray wolf once had a larger distribution than any other land mammal, once ranging over all of North America from Alaska and Arctic Canada southward to central Mexico and throughout Europe and Asia above 20° N latitude. It lived in every type of habitat except tropical forests and the most arid deserts, and it was the premier hunter of the large hoofed mammals. Several subspecies occur throughout North America, Eurasia, and Africa; however, classifications disagree on the number of wolf subspecies. Wolves were first domesticated in northern Eurasia sometime between 14,000 and 29,000 years ago, and selective breeding produced dogs (C. lupus familiaris). gray wolfThe wolf is built for travel. Its long legs, large feet, and deep but narrow chest suit it well for life on the move. Keen senses, large canine teeth, powerful jaws, and the ability to pursue prey at 60 km (37 miles) per hour equip the wolf well for a predatory way of life. A typical northern male may be about 2 metres (6.6 feet) long, including the bushy half-metre-long tail. Standing 76 cm (30 inches) tall at the shoulder, it weighs about 45 kg (100 pounds), but weight ranges from 14 to 65 kg (31 to 143 pounds), depending on the geographic area. Females average about 20 percent smaller than males. The largest wolves are found in west-central Canada, Alaska, and across northern Asia. The smallest tend to be near the southern end of their distribution (the Middle East, Arabia, and India). Fur on the upper body, though usually gray, may be brown, reddish, black, or whitish, while the underparts and legs are usually yellow-white. Light-coloured wolves are common in Arctic regions. Early human societies that hunted for survival admired the wolf and tried to imitate its habits, but in recent centuries the wolf has been widely viewed as an evil creature, a danger to humans (especially in Eurasia), a competitor for big game animals, and a threat to livestock. Depredation of livestock was the primary justification for eradicating the wolf from virtually all of the United States, Mexico, and most of Europe. Wolves in the United States were killed by every method imaginable in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and by 1950 they remained only in the northeastern corner of Minnesota.






Britannica Quiz
Ultimate Animals Quiz
Could you lead the tour at your local zoo? Challenge your animal awareness with this quiz.



 Mexican gray wolfLearn how wolves are migrating from Germany back into Denmark after having been exterminated two centuries agoSee all videos for this articleIn the late 20th century, greater tolerance, legal protection, and other factors allowed their range to expand in portions of North America and Europe. In 1974 gray wolves were classified as an endangered species by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service under the Endangered Species Act. In 1995 wolves from Canada were reintroduced to Yellowstone National Park and Idaho, and captive-reared Mexican wolves (a subspecies) were released to their former range in eastern Arizona beginning in 1998. At the beginning of the 21st century, an estimated 65,000–78,000 wolves inhabited North America. Canada had the largest population (although the provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island had no wolves), followed by Alaska and Minnesota. Some of the western states as well as Michigan and Wisconsin have smaller but recovering wolf populations, which numbered more than 6,000 in total by 2020. Canadian wolves are protected only within provincial parks, and despite the species’s removal from the Endangered Species Act in 2021, all wolves in the contiguous United States receive some level of legal protection by federal and state governments. Populations in southern Europe and Scandinavia are relatively small but are increasing. The Eurasian population probably exceeds 100,000 and is stable or increasing in most countries, and most afford the wolf some degree of legal protection. Worldwide, there are between 200,000 and 250,000 wolves, and they still occupy about two-thirds of their former range. Although often thought of as wilderness animals, wolves can and do thrive close to people when they are not excessively persecuted and food is available. Wolves usually live in packs of up to two dozen individuals, but packs numbering 6 to 10 are most common. A pack is basically a family group consisting of an adult breeding pair (the alpha male and alpha female) and their offspring of various ages. Each individual has its own distinct personality. The ability of wolves to form strong social bonds with one another is what makes the wolf pack possible. A dominance hierarchy is established within the pack, which helps maintain order. The alpha male and female continually assert themselves over their subordinates, and they guide the activities of the group. The female predominates in roles such as care and defense of pups, whereas the male predominates in foraging and food provisioning and in travels associated with those activities. Both sexes are very active in attacking and killing prey, but during the summer hunts are often conducted alone.
Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content. 
Subscribe Now
 A pack’s territory can be 80 to 3,000 square km (31 to 1,200 square miles), depending on prey abundance, and it is vigorously defended against neighbouring packs. Wolves communicate with one another by visual signaling (facial expression, body position, tail position), vocalizations, and scent marking. Howling helps the pack stay in contact and also seems to strengthen social bonds among pack members. Along with howling, marking of territory with urine and feces lets neighbouring packs know they should not intrude. Intruders are often killed by resident packs, yet in some circumstances they are accepted. Breeding occurs between February and April, and a litter of usually five or six pups is born in the spring after a gestation period of about two months. The young are usually born in a den consisting of a natural hole or a burrow, often in a hillside. A rock crevice, hollow log, overturned stump, or abandoned beaver lodge may be used as a den, and even a depression beneath the lower branches of a conifer will sometimes suffice. All members of the pack care solicitously for the young. After being weaned from their mother’s milk at six to nine weeks, they are fed a diet of regurgitated meat. Throughout spring and summer the pups are the centre of attention as well as the geographic focus of the pack’s activities. After a few weeks pups are usually moved from the den to a “rendezvous site” above ground where they play and sleep while adults hunt. The pups grow rapidly and are moved farther and more often as summer comes to an end. In autumn the pack starts to travel again within its territory, and the pups must keep up. Most pups are almost adult size by October or November. After two or more years in the pack, many leave to search for a mate, establish a new territory, and possibly even start their own pack. Those who stay with the pack may eventually replace a parent to become a breeding animal (alpha). Large packs seem to result from fewer young wolves’ leaving the group and from litters’ being produced by more than one female. Wolves that leave their packs are known to have traveled as far as 886 km (550 miles). Wolves are renowned for their wide-ranging travels, and it is not unusual for them to cover 20 km (12 miles) or more in a day. They move and hunt mostly at night, especially in areas populated by humans and during warm weather. The main prey are large herbivores such as deer, elk, moose, bison, bighorn sheep, caribou, and musk oxen, which they chase, seize, and pull to the ground. Beavers and hares are eaten when available, and wolves in western Canada even fish for Pacific salmon. A large percentage of the animals that wolves kill are young, old, or in poor condition. After making a kill, the pack gorges (consuming some 3 to 9 kg [7 to 20 pounds] per animal) and then lingers, often reducing the carcass to hair and a few bones before moving on to look for another meal. Biologists still disagree on the effect wolves have on the size of prey populations. Wolves may kill livestock and dogs when they have the opportunity, yet many wolves that live near livestock rarely, if ever, kill them. The number of stock killed in North America is small but increasing as wolves expand their range. In some areas wolves survive only by killing livestock and eating livestock carrion and human garbage. Nonetheless, wolves usually avoid contact with humans. There have been few substantiated wolf attacks on humans in North America. Such attacks are unusual but have occurred in Eurasia and India and sometimes have resulted in death.
 Wolves have few natural enemies other than man. They can live up to 13 years in the wild, but most die long before that age. Diseases and parasites that can affect wolves include canine parvovirus, distemper, rabies, blastomycosis, Lyme disease, lice, mange, and heartworm. In most areas of the world, humans are the leading cause of death for wolves. In areas of high wolf density and declining prey populations, the major causes of death are killing by other wolves and starvation.  












 


























Wolf | National Geographic






Skip to contentNewslettersSubscribeMenuAnimalsPhoto ArkGray wolf3:53Wolves 101With their piercing looks and spine-tingling howls, wolves inspire both adoration and controversy around the world. Find out how many wolf species exist, the characteristics that make each wolf's howl unique, and how the wolf population in the continental United States nearly became extinct.ShareTweetEmailCommon Name: Gray WolfScientific Name: Canis lupusType: MammalsDiet: CarnivoreGroup Name: PackAverage Life Span In The Wild: 6 to 8 yearsSize: Head and body: 36 to 63 inches; tail: 13 to 20 inchesWeight: 40 to 175 poundsSize relative to a 6-ft human: IUCN Red List Status: ?  Least concern LCNTVUENCREWEX Least Concern  Extinct  Current Population Trend: StableWhat are gray wolves?Wolves are legendary because of their spine-tingling howl, which they use to communicate. A lone wolf howls to attract the attention of his pack, while communal howls may send territorial messages from one pack to another. Some howls are confrontational. Much like barking domestic dogs, wolves may simply begin howling because a nearby wolf has already begun.Population and conservationWolves are the largest members of the dog family. Adaptable gray wolves are by far the most common and were once found all over the Northern Hemisphere. But wolves and humans have a long adversarial history. Though they almost never attack humans, wolves are considered one of the animal world's most fearsome natural villains. They do attack domestic animals, and countless wolves have been shot, trapped, and poisoned because of this tendency.In the lower 48 states, gray wolves were hunted to near extinction, though some populations survived and others have since been reintroduced. Few gray wolves survive in Europe, though many live in Alaska, Canada, and Asia.Wolf pack behaviorWolves live and hunt in packs of around six to ten animals. They are known to roam large distances, perhaps 12 miles in a single day. These social animals cooperate on their preferred prey—large animals such as deer, elk, and moose. When they are successful, wolves do not eat in moderation. A single animal can consume 20 pounds of meat at a sitting. Wolves also eat smaller mammals, birds, fish, lizards, snakes, and fruit.Wolfpacks are established according to a strict hierarchy, with a dominant male at the top and his mate not far behind. Usually this male and female are the only animals of the pack to breed. All of a pack's adults help to care for young pups by bringing them food and watching them while others hunt.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.1 / 21 / 2A Mexican wolf (<i>Canis lupus baileyi</i>), a subspecies of gray wolf, photographed at Wild Canid Survival and Research Center in St. Louis, Missourigray-wolf_01A Mexican wolf (Canis lupus baileyi), a subspecies of gray wolf, photographed at Wild Canid Survival and Research Center in St. Louis, MissouriPhotograph by Joel Sartore, National Geographic Photo ArkDid You Know?- It’s believed that wolves were first tamed in East Asia about 15,000 years ago.- In Canada, beachcombing wolves swim between islands, eating crabs, clams, and other tidbits.- Gray wolves are the planet’s most widespread large land mammals after humans and livestock.- A wolf pack is two or more wolves that have a defined territory.- Wolves can go for more than a week without eating.2:53WATCH: Photographing the Wild Wolves of YellowstoneHear photographer Ronan Donovan describe the challenge of documenting one of Yellowstone's most elusive and iconic species.ShareTweetEmailGo FurtherAnimalsThe scramble to save the Appalachian monkeyface musselAnimalsThe scramble to save the Appalachian monkeyface musselThe race to stop lanternflies—before they get to a town near youAnimalsThe race to stop lanternflies—before they get to a town near youWhy these colorful fish engage in mouth-to-mouth showdownsAnimalsWhy these colorful fish engage in mouth-to-mouth showdownsA glimmer of hope for one of the world's rarest penguinsAnimalsA glimmer of hope for one of the world's rarest penguinsAmerican bison all have some cattle DNA. Here’s why.AnimalsAmerican bison all have some cattle DNA. Here’s why.See the year's best wildlife photosAnimalsSee the year's best wildlife photosEnvironmentThe world's biggest marine reserve seems to be doing its jobEnvironmentPlanet PossibleThe world's biggest marine reserve seems to be doing its jobWildfires can intensify destructive storms half a continent awayEnvironmentWildfires can intensify destructive storms half a continent awayOnce devastated, these reefs have seen an amazing rebirthMagazineOnce devastated, these reefs have seen an amazing rebirthIs building more dams the way to save rivers?EnvironmentIs building more dams the way to save rivers?4 easy ways to make your holidays more eco-friendlyMagazinePlanet Possible4 easy ways to make your holidays more eco-friendlyMelting mountain peaks could kill thousands. Can science help?EnvironmentMelting mountain peaks could kill thousands. Can science help?History & Culture10 things to know about the discovery of King Tut's tombHistory & Culture10 things to know about the discovery of King Tut's tombDante's 'Inferno' is a journey to hell and backHistory MagazineDante's 'Inferno' is a journey to hell and backSee how Superstorm Sandy changed the NortheastHistory & CultureSee how Superstorm Sandy changed the NortheastEaster Island’s iconic statues remain at risk after fireHistory & CultureEaster Island’s iconic statues remain at risk after fireHow ancient Egyptians of all classes strived for eternal lifeHistory MagazineHow ancient Egyptians of all classes strived for eternal lifeWho was King Tut?History & CultureWho was King Tut?ScienceOzempic, TikTok's favorite weight loss drug, is unprovenScienceOzempic, TikTok's favorite weight loss drug, is unprovenWhy scientists want to create psychedelics that give better tripsScienceWhy scientists want to create psychedelics that give better tripsA deadly monkeypox variant is surging in Central AfricaScienceA deadly monkeypox variant is surging in Central AfricaOmicron subvariants BQ.1 and BQ.1.1 may soon take over the U.S.ScienceCoronavirus CoverageOmicron subvariants BQ.1 and BQ.1.1 may soon take over the U.S.Our bodies are unique. Our cancers are too.ScienceOur bodies are unique. Our cancers are too.Could COVID-19 trigger depression?ScienceCoronavirus CoverageCould COVID-19 trigger depression?TravelThe bloody legend of Hungary’s serial killer countessTravelThe bloody legend of Hungary’s serial killer countessThese Mexican mummies draw crowds—and controversyTravelThese Mexican mummies draw crowds—and controversy16 spooky places to visit around the worldTravel16 spooky places to visit around the worldTop 10 things to know about the Day of the DeadHistory & CultureTop 10 things to know about the Day of the DeadWelcome to the Wales you don’t knowTravelWelcome to the Wales you don’t knowCruises on the Great Lakes are giving new life to the Rust BeltTravelCruises on the Great Lakes are giving new life to the Rust BeltSubscriber Exclusive ContentpreviousMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExploreMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExploreMagazineWhy are people so dang obsessed with Mars?ReadMagazineHow viruses shape our worldReadAnimalsThe era of greyhound racing in the U.S. is coming to an endReadMagazineSee how people have imagined life on Mars through historyReadMagazineSee how NASA’s new Mars rover will explore the red planetExplorenext               See MoreLegalTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy RightsChildren's Online Privacy PolicyInterest-Based AdsAbout Nielsen MeasurementDo Not Sell My InfoOur SitesNat Geo HomeAttend a Live EventBook a TripBuy MapsInspire Your KidsShop Nat GeoVisit the D.C. MuseumWatch TVLearn About Our ImpactSupport our MissionNat Geo PartnersMastheadPress RoomAdvertise With UsJoin UsSubscribeCustomer ServiceRenew SubscriptionManage Your SubscriptionWork at Nat GeoSign up for Our NewslettersContribute to Protect the PlanetPitch a StoryFollow usNational Geographic FacebookNational Geographic TwitterNational Geographic InstagramUnited States (Change)Copyright © 1996-2015 National Geographic SocietyCopyright © 2015-2022 National Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

















Wolf Definition & Meaning - Merriam-Webster









































































SINCE 1828













GAMES & QUIZZES
THESAURUS
WORD OF THE DAY
FEATURES
SHOP 
            

Buying Guide 
M-W Books 


JOIN MWU












MY WORDSMY WORDS





RECENTS

settings
log out


LOG IN
REGISTER



















dictionary
thesaurus












Log in


Sign Up



Hello,





Games & Quizzes
Thesaurus
Word of the Day
Features
Buying Guide 
M-W Books 
Join MWU







My WordsMy Words







                  View Recents
              






              Account
              



Log Out














wolf
noun, often attributive 










 
Save Word








\ ˈwu̇lf 


,  nonstandard  ˈwu̇f \






 plural wolves\
 ˈwu̇lvz     
,  nonstandard      ˈwu̇vz     
\ 





Definition of wolf (Entry 1 of 2) 





1
 plural also wolf 



a

: any of several large predatory canids (genus Canis) that are active mostly at night, live and hunt in packs, and resemble the related dogs


especially
: gray wolf 

Note:
            Wolves have long been viewed as threats to livestock and people resulting in significant worldwide declines in their numbers and range size due to persistent eradication efforts (as by hunting, trapping, and poisoning).      
  


b

: the fur of a wolf

 





2a(1)

: a fierce, rapacious, or destructive person

 
(2)

: a man forward, direct, and zealous in amatory attentions to women

  


b

: dire poverty : starvation
keep the wolf from the door

 


c

: the maggot of a warble fly

 




3

[German; from the howling sound] 




a(1)

: dissonance in some chords on organs, pianos, or other instruments with fixed tones tuned by unequal temperament

 
(2)

: an instance of such dissonance

  


b

: a harshness due to faulty vibration in various tones in a bowed instrument

 



wolf in sheep's clothing





: one who cloaks a hostile intention with a friendly manner

 







wolf
verb 





wolfed; wolfing; wolfs 





Definition of wolf (Entry 2 of 2) 



transitive verb




: to eat greedily : devour

 













            Other Words from wolf









            Synonyms        








            Example Sentences          








            Phrases Containing wolf









            Learn More About wolf





Other Words from wolf
Noun

wolflike
\
 ˈwu̇lf-​ˌlīk     

\
adjective







Synonyms for wolf
Synonyms: Noun
Casanova, Don Juan, lecher, lothario, lounge lizard, masher, philanderer, satyr, womanizer Synonyms: Verb
bolt, cram, devour, glut [archaic], gobble, gorge, gormandize, gulp, ingurgitate, inhale, raven, scarf, scoff, slop
Visit the Thesaurus for More 


Examples of wolf in a Sentence

Noun



         
                        no sooner had the lottery winner's name been made public than the wolves with their investment schemes showed up on her doorstep    
Verb



         
                        don't wolf your food or you'll be sick    



Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

Halioua hopes that the startup whose name is emblazoned on her slim black T-shirt—Loyal—can start to fix this bug in humanity’s 14,000-year-plus wolf bioengineering project.

        	—
        	
            Tom Simonite, WIRED, 13 Oct. 2022        	



Wildlife officials said the agency has been investigating wolf deaths within the Wedge pack territory in Stevens County since local authorities discovered four dead wolves on Feb. 18.

        	—
        	
CBS News, 11 Oct. 2022        	



The Department of Natural Resources’ wolf management plan dates to 1999 and calls for capping the statewide population at 350 animals.

        	—
        	
            From Usa Today Network And Wire Reports, USA TODAY, 20 July 2022        	



The bill would do nothing to actually change current wolf management.

        	—
        	
            Lindsey Botts, The Arizona Republic, 6 Mar. 2022        	



All three were updating their wolf management programs and officials said that work would continue.

        	—
        	
NBC News, 10 Feb. 2022        	



Yellowstone wolves made up 90 percent of deaths in the Gardiner and Cooke City wolf management units along the park’s border, according to Montana’s most recent numbers.

        	—
        	
            Margaret Osborne And Rachael Lallensack, Smithsonian Magazine, 9 Feb. 2022        	



The way University of Wisconsin-Madison environmental studies professor Adrian Treves sees it, the DNR needs to apply much more science to its wolf management.

        	—
        	
            Susan Bence, Star Tribune, 17 May 2021        	



Kim Kardashian as Little Red Riding Hood Kim and pal Cheban (not pictured) went all-out for Heidi Klum's Halloween party in N.Y.C., dressing as Little Red Riding Hood and the wolf, respectively.

        	—
        	
            Maria Yagoda, Peoplemag, 29 Sep. 2022        	


Recent Examples on the Web: Verb

Some of these guys wolf down rib eyes between pitches.

        	—
        	
            Nick Canepacolumnist, San Diego Union-Tribune, 9 July 2022        	



For the time being, project assistants buzz around with power tools and lots of questions, pausing occasionally to wolf down slices of pizza.

        	—
        	
            Naomi Waxman, sun-sentinel.com, 14 July 2021        	



The letter also said there were cultural considerations that should be accounted for in a delisting, alluding to the opposition by some Native Americans to wolf hunting.

        	—
        	
Star Tribune, 19 Dec. 2020        	



Mexicano and my sisters and I would wolf it down whenever Mom made it.

        	—
        	
            Anita L. Arambula, San Diego Union-Tribune, 16 Sep. 2020        	



Maestas said Catron County, New Mexico, long a holdout to wolf releases, has joined the conservation effort.

        	—
        	
            Debra Utacia Krol, azcentral, 19 Mar. 2020        	



America is the world’s second-biggest meat market; the average American wolfs down more than 100kg a year.

        	—
        	
The Economist, 27 Feb. 2020        	



After wolfing down the food, Rojas said, the couple ordered 10 burritos to go before heading off to the flight back to Denver.

        	—
        	
Los Angeles Times, 2 Jan. 2020        	



The aliens are still out there, of course, and probably getting pretty hungry, having wolfed down so much of Earth's population in the first film.

        	—
        	
            Jennifer Ouellette, Ars Technica, 1 Jan. 2020        	


See More


                                These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'wolf.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
                            


Phrases Containing wolf




gray wolf
prairie wolf
keep the wolf from the door
dire wolf
cry wolf
Eastern timber wolf
timber wolf
lone wolf
maned wolf
wolf tree
wolf pack
wolf in sheep's clothing
wolf dog
wolf spider
wolf whistle
red wolf

See More
 



gray wolf
prairie wolf
keep the wolf from the door
dire wolf
cry wolf
Eastern timber wolf
timber wolf
lone wolf
maned wolf
wolf tree
wolf pack
wolf in sheep's clothing
wolf dog
wolf spider
wolf whistle
red wolf

See More
  


First Known Use of wolf
Noun
before the 12th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1a Verb
1862, in the meaning defined above 

History and Etymology for wolf
Noun

                Middle English, from Old English wulf; akin to Old High German wolf wolf, Latin lupus, Greek lykos 



Learn More About wolf



Share wolf



Post the Definition of wolf to Facebook



Share the Definition of wolf on Twitter






Time Traveler for wolf



The first known use of wolf was 
                                before the 12th century
See more words from the same century




From the Editors at Merriam-Webster



 


Sly Fox, Fat Cat: Animal Names for...
Sly Fox, Fat Cat: Animal Names for People
From 'lame duck' to 'lounge lizard'








Dictionary Entries Near wolf

Wolds, The


wolf


Wolf

See More Nearby Entries 









Statistics for wolf

Last Updated
15 Oct 2022

Look-up Popularity





Cite this Entry
“Wolf.” Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/wolf. Accessed 22 Oct. 2022.


Style: MLA



MLA
Chicago
APA
Merriam-Webster









 


More Definitions for wolf




wolf
noun 





\ ˈwu̇lf 


\






 plural wolves\
 ˈwu̇lvz     

\ 





Kids Definition of wolf (Entry 1 of 2) 





1
 plural also wolf 
: any of several large bushy-tailed mammals with ears standing straight up that resemble the related dogs, that prey on other animals, and that often live and hunt in packs


especially
: gray wolf  — compare coyote, jackal
  




2

: a person who resembles a wolf in fierceness

 




Other Words from wolf

wolfish
\
 ˈwu̇l-​fish     
\
adjective


wolflike
\
 ˈwu̇l-​ˌflīk     

\
adjective





wolf
verb 





Kids Definition of wolf (Entry 2 of 2) 






: to eat greedily
wolfed down the pizza

 








Wolf
biographical name (1) 







\ ˈvȯlf 


\






Definition of Wolf (Entry 1 of 2) 






Friedrich August 1759–1824 German philologist

 






Wolf
biographical name (2) 





Definition of Wolf (Entry 2 of 2) 






Hugo Philipp Jakob 1860–1903 Austrian composer

 







More from Merriam-Webster on wolf
Nglish: Translation of wolf for Spanish Speakers
Britannica English: Translation of wolf for Arabic Speakers
Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about wolf







WORD OF THE DAY




abide






See Definitions and Examples »
  

Get Word of the Day daily email!









Test Your Vocabulary


Odd Habits and Quirks







Which of the following best describes an easily irritated person?




flashy
gregarious
 superficial
tetchy







Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?
TAKE THE QUIZ





A daily challenge for crossword fanatics.
TAKE THE QUIZ



 




Love words? Need even more definitions?
Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search—ad free!
Merriam-Webster unabridged




Words at Play





'Dunderhead' and Other ‘Nicer’ Ways to Say Stupid
As illustrated by some very smart pups







10 Words from Place Names
Bikini, bourbon, and badminton were places first







'Pride': The Word That Went From Vice to Strength 
Do you take pride in Pride?







When Were Words First Used?
Look up any year to find out




 
Ask the Editors





Literally
How to use a word that (literally) drives some pe...







'All Intensive Purposes' or 'All Intents and Purposes'?
We're intent on clearing it up







Lay vs. Lie
Editor Emily Brewster clarifies the difference.







Hot Mess
"The public is a hot mess"




 
Word Games





Face Your Fears
Don't be scared to answer these questions about f...
Take the quiz







Name That Thing MegaQuiz: Vol. 2
Test your visual vocabulary!
Take the quiz







Spell It
Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?
Take the quiz







Spelling Bee Quiz
Can you outdo past winners of the National Spelli...
Take the quiz




 




Merriam Webster




Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!








OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES


MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARY API


NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION




FOLLOW US


Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram








Browse the Dictionary:
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
0-9
BIO
GEO


Home 
Help 
About Us 
Shop 
Advertising Info 
Dictionary API 
Contact Us 
Join MWU 
Videos 
Word of the Year 
Vocabulary Resources 
Law Dictionary 
Medical Dictionary 
Privacy Policy 
Terms of Use


Browse the Thesaurus 
Browse the Medical Dictionary
Browse the Legal Dictionary

© 2022 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated





Wolf (2021) - IMDb 


MenuMoviesRelease CalendarTop 250 MoviesMost Popular MoviesBrowse Movies by GenreTop Box OfficeShowtimes & TicketsMovie NewsIndia Movie SpotlightTV ShowsWhat's on TV & StreamingTop 250 TV ShowsMost Popular TV ShowsBrowse TV Shows by GenreTV NewsIndia TV SpotlightWatchWhat to WatchLatest TrailersIMDb OriginalsIMDb PicksIMDb PodcastsAwards & EventsOscarsBest Picture WinnersBest Picture WinnersEmmysSTARmeter AwardsSan Diego Comic-ConNew York Comic-ConSundance Film FestivalToronto Int'l Film FestivalAwards CentralFestival CentralAll EventsCelebsBorn TodayMost Popular CelebsMost Popular CelebsCelebrity NewsCommunityHelp CenterContributor ZonePollsFor Industry ProfessionalsAllAllTitlesTV EpisodesCelebsCompaniesKeywordsAdvanced SearchWatchlistSign InENFully supportedEnglish (United States)Partially supportedFrançais (Canada)Français (France)Deutsch (Deutschland)हिंदी (भारत)Italiano (Italia)Português (Brasil)Español (España)Español (México)





Cast & crewUser reviewsTriviaIMDbProAll topicsWolf20212021RR1h 39mIMDb RATING5.5/1012KYOUR RATINGRatePOPULARITY2,549548Play trailer2:072 Videos65 PhotosDramaMysteryThrillerA high-concept arthouse drama about a boy who believes he is a wolf.A high-concept arthouse drama about a boy who believes he is a wolf.A high-concept arthouse drama about a boy who believes he is a wolf.IMDb RATING5.5/1012KYOUR RATINGRatePOPULARITY2,549548DirectorNathalie BiancheriWriterNathalie BiancheriStarsGeorge MacKayStuart GrahamHelen BehanTop creditsDirectorNathalie BiancheriWriterNathalie BiancheriStarsGeorge MacKayStuart GrahamHelen BehanSee production, box office & company info70User reviews33Critic reviews52MetascoreSee more at IMDbPro





Awards1 win & 2 nominations





Videos2Trailer 2:07Watch Official TrailerTrailer 2:11Watch WolfPhotos65





Top castEditGeorge MacKayJacobStuart GrahamJacob's FatherHelen BehanJacob's MotherLily-Rose DeppWildcatLola PetticrewParrottElsa FionuirHorseDarragh ShannonJeremy…Eileen WalshDr. AngeliFionn O'SheaGerman ShepherdSenan JenningsDuckAmy MackenOla…Leo HannaAlmost OutKarise YansenAnnalisaPaddy ConsidineThe ZookeeperShelley AtkinsonSquirrel's MumMartin McCannDr. SullivanTerry NotaryLion ManMary Lou McCarthyGerman Shepherd's MotherDirectorNathalie BiancheriWriterNathalie BiancheriAll cast & crewProduction, box office & more at IMDbProMore like this6.0Vengeance Is Mine6.7Through the Glass Darkly5.9Braven3.4Marmaduke4.3Last Man Down5.8Office Uprising5.2Girl Next6.8Freaky Deaky6.3Brut Force5.9Wired Shut4.5The Stairs6.1Nocturnal





StorylineEditDid you knowEditTriviaGeorge Mackay spent weeks writing daily diary entries in the voice of his character in order to "explain his inner thoughts." He also spent a long time doing intense physical training with famed movement coach Terry Notary.QuotesJacob: It's not about surviving, it's about surviving as me.ConnectionsReferenced in Midnight Screenings: Felidae/First Reformed/Beyond the Reach (2021)User reviews70ReviewReviewFeatured review2/10 The Wolf Movie No One Asked ForWhat did I just watch. MAYBE it could have been a short film...at best. I wanted to cover my ears and gouge my eyes out simultaneously, while then deleting my whole HBO Max account for allowing me to witness this fodder. The script was what you'd expect from an amateur High School theater group, desperate to prove they're edgy and avant-garde. It's one of those roles for Lily-Rose Depp that screams "I don't need nepotism, I can destroy my acting career on my own". And while I admire McKay, and love seeing his career really pick up...lately the majority of his character choices are all the same formula: awkward blank stares, moody huffing and puffing, scowling, gaunt Tim Burton-character-come-to-life energy. Was there ever really a reason for this movie? Did someone think, "You know what kind of movie we need right now?" He was a painfully awkward kid that thought he was a wolf, and that's LITERALLY the whole story.helpful•51rmonroe811Sep 6, 2022DetailsEditRelease dateFebruary 18, 2022 (Poland)Countries of originIrelandUnited KingdomPolandOfficial siteOfficial siteLanguageEnglishAlso known asВолкFilming locationsIrelandProduction companiesFeline FilmsHead Gear FilmsKreo Films FZSee more company credits at IMDbProBox officeEditGross US & Canada$147,595Opening weekend US & Canada$82,640Dec 5, 2021Gross worldwide$565,825See detailed box office info on IMDbProTechnical specsEditRuntime1 hour 39 minutesColorColorAspect ratio1.85 : 1Related newsContribute to this pageSuggest an edit or add missing contentTop GapWhat is the Japanese language plot outline for Wolf (2021)?AnswerSee more gapsLearn more about contributingEdit page





More to explore





Recently viewedYou have no recently viewed pagesGet the IMDb AppSign in for more accessSign in for more accessGet the IMDb AppHelpSite IndexIMDbProBox Office MojoIMDb DeveloperPress RoomAdvertisingJobsConditions of UsePrivacy PolicyInterest-Based AdsIMDb, an Amazon company© 1990-2022 by IMDb.com, Inc.





Wolf (1994) - IMDb 


MenuMoviesRelease CalendarTop 250 MoviesMost Popular MoviesBrowse Movies by GenreTop Box OfficeShowtimes & TicketsMovie NewsIndia Movie SpotlightTV ShowsWhat's on TV & StreamingTop 250 TV ShowsMost Popular TV ShowsBrowse TV Shows by GenreTV NewsIndia TV SpotlightWatchWhat to WatchLatest TrailersIMDb OriginalsIMDb PicksIMDb PodcastsAwards & EventsOscarsBest Picture WinnersBest Picture WinnersEmmysSTARmeter AwardsSan Diego Comic-ConNew York Comic-ConSundance Film FestivalToronto Int'l Film FestivalAwards CentralFestival CentralAll EventsCelebsBorn TodayMost Popular CelebsMost Popular CelebsCelebrity NewsCommunityHelp CenterContributor ZonePollsFor Industry ProfessionalsAllAllTitlesTV EpisodesCelebsCompaniesKeywordsAdvanced SearchWatchlistSign InENFully supportedEnglish (United States)Partially supportedFrançais (Canada)Français (France)Deutsch (Deutschland)हिंदी (भारत)Italiano (Italia)Português (Brasil)Español (España)Español (México)





Cast & crewUser reviewsTriviaIMDbProAll topicsWolf19941994RR2h 5mIMDb RATING6.2/1057KYOUR RATINGRatePOPULARITY3,3905Play trailer2:051 Video99+ PhotosDramaHorrorRomancePublisher Will Randall becomes a demon wolf and has to fight to keep his job.Publisher Will Randall becomes a demon wolf and has to fight to keep his job.Publisher Will Randall becomes a demon wolf and has to fight to keep his job.IMDb RATING6.2/1057KYOUR RATINGRatePOPULARITY3,3905DirectorMike NicholsWritersJim HarrisonWesley StrickStarsJack NicholsonMichelle PfeifferJames SpaderTop creditsDirectorMike NicholsWritersJim HarrisonWesley StrickStarsJack NicholsonMichelle PfeifferJames SpaderSee production, box office & company info172User reviews88Critic reviewsSee more at IMDbPro





Awards2 wins & 10 nominations





Videos1Trailer 2:05Watch WolfPhotos200





Top castEditJack NicholsonWill RandallMichelle PfeifferLaura AldenJames SpaderStewart SwintonKate NelliganCharlotte RandallRichard JenkinsDetective BridgerChristopher PlummerRaymond AldenEileen AtkinsMaryDavid Hyde PierceRoyOm PuriDr. Vijay AlezaisRon RifkinDoctorPrunella ScalesMaudeBrian MarkinsonDetective WadePeter GeretyGeorgeBradford EnglishKeyesStewart J. ZullyGaryThomas F. DuffyTomTom OppenheimButlerShirin DevrimParty GuestDirectorMike NicholsWritersJim HarrisonWesley StrickAll cast & crewProduction, box office & more at IMDbProMore like this6.5The Witches of Eastwick6.3The Crossing Guard6.9Gilda Live6.6Hoffa5.8The Wolfman5.7The Fortune6.0Blood and Wine6.8The Pledge7.2About Schmidt5.6What Planet Are You From?6.6The Postman Always Rings Twice4.7Man Trouble





StorylineEditDid you knowEditTriviaAt the beginning of production, Jack Nicholson told Special Make-up Effects Supervisor Rick Baker that he was allergic to spirit gum. While he initially didn't believe him, Baker agreed to use a specific medical adhesive on Nicholson which made hand laying the hair on him very difficult as opposed to using spirit gum. One day after he made up James Spader using spirit gum, Baker unintentionally used the same bottle of spirit gum on Nicholson. Baker soon realized what he had done and hoped that Jack wouldn't find out seeing how nothing happened during the application. The next day, Baker was horrified to see that Nicholson wasn't lying as he entered the make-up trailer with large red swells on his face. Nicholson said, "Ricky boy, you used spirit gum, didn't you?" Baker apologized for the confusion and Nicholson stated, "Well, let's just hope it doesn't happen again." Fortunately for everyone, it didn't happen again.GoofsThere was no blood on Will's teeth and mouth after he kills the deer.QuotesWill Randall: What do you do?Laura: Why do you care?Will Randall: I don't. I was just making polite conversation.Laura: I'd rather not discuss what I do.Will Randall: You know, I think I understand what you're like now. You're very beautiful and you think men are only interested in you because you're beautiful, but you want them to be interested in you because you're you. The problem is, aside from all that beauty, you're not very interesting. You're rude, you're hostile, you're sullen, you're withdrawn. I know you want someone to look past all that at the real person underneath but the only reason anyone would bother to look past all that is because you're beautful. Ironic, isn't it? In an odd way you're your own problem.Laura: Sorry. Wrong line. I am not taken aback by your keen insight and suddenly challenged by you.ConnectionsFeatured in At the Movies: Speed/The Endless Summer 2/The Lion King/City Slickers II: The Legend of Curley's Gold (1994)User reviews172ReviewReviewFeatured review8/10 Gets Better and Better When You See for the Second TimeWhile driving through Vermont, New England, the middle age chief editor Will Randall (Jack Nicholson) hits a wolf with his car. He stops the car to drag the animal out of the road, but the wolf is alive and bites his hand. He goes to the doctor, takes rabies vaccine and the doctor releases him.Will is under stress in her job since the publishing house where he works has been bought by the tough millionaire Raymond Alden (Christopher Plummer) and the employees are expecting downsizing. Will is supported by his wife Charlotte Randall (Kate Nelligan) and his colleague and assistant Stewart Swinton (James Spader).Raymond invites Will to a party at his manor and he offers an unwanted job position in Eastern Europe to him and he learns that he had been betrayed by Stewart, who will occupy his position in the publishing house. Will also meets Raymond's rebel daughter Laura Alden (Michelle Pfeiffer).On the next morning, Will Randall goes to his work and learns that he has acute senses and he feels more competitive and decided to fight for his job. Further he discovers that Charlotte is cheating on him with Stewart and that Laura and he are in love with each other. But Will Randall is becoming a wolf and his transformation changes completely his life.I saw "Wolf" for the first time in 1994 and yesterday I saw this film again and I found it better and better than the first time that I saw it. The story perfectly combines drama, horror and romance, with Michelle Pfeiffer very beautiful and a great dispute among the characters performed by Jack Nicholson, James Spader and Christopher Plummer. The conclusion is open to interpretation whether the wild side of Laura Alden is transforming her or the sexual intercourse with Will Randall. My vote is eight.Title (Brazil): "Lobo" ("Wolf")helpful•305claudio_carvalhoSep 5, 2012FAQ10What is "Wolf" about?Is "Wolf" based on a book?Was Will bitten by a werewolf?DetailsEditRelease dateJune 17, 1994 (United States)Country of originUnited StatesLanguagesEnglishSpanishAlso known asSóiFilming locationsBradbury Building - 304 S. Broadway, Downtown, Los Angeles, California, USAProduction companyColumbia PicturesSee more company credits at IMDbProBox officeEditBudget$70,000,000 (estimated)Gross US & Canada$65,002,597Opening weekend US & Canada$17,911,366Jun 19, 1994Gross worldwide$131,002,597See detailed box office info on IMDbProTechnical specsEditRuntime2 hours 5 minutesSound mixDolby SRDolby DigitalAspect ratio1.85 : 1Related newsContribute to this pageSuggest an edit or add missing contentTop GapWhat was the official certification given to Wolf (1994) in Brazil?AnswerSee more gapsLearn more about contributingEdit page





More to explore





Recently viewedYou have no recently viewed pagesGet the IMDb AppSign in for more accessSign in for more accessGet the IMDb AppHelpSite IndexIMDbProBox Office MojoIMDb DeveloperPress RoomAdvertisingJobsConditions of UsePrivacy PolicyInterest-Based AdsIMDb, an Amazon company© 1990-2022 by IMDb.com, Inc.









Wolf Appliances | Ranges, Built-In Ovens, Cooktops & More



























































































 









                Friendly reminder: This website utilizes cookies to track and tailor your online experience. By using this website, you are accepting these terms. You may change your cookie settings in your web browser at any time. Cookie Policy



ACKNOWLEDGE




Skip to main content






























Log In


Locator





Accessories




Promotions






















Home

Shop Products





SUB-ZERO





Full-Size Refrigeration


Wine Storage


Undercounter Refrigeration


Outdoor Refrigeration






WOLF





Ranges


Built-In Ovens


Cooktops & Rangetops


Ventilation






Microwaves


Warming Drawers


Coffee Systems


Module Cooktops






Outdoor Grills


Vacuum Seal Drawer


Outdoor Cooking


Wolf Gourmet






COVE





Dishwashers








SUB-ZERO



Full-Size Refrigeration


Wine Storage


Undercounter Refrigeration


Outdoor Refrigeration




WOLF



Ranges


Built-In Ovens


Cooktops & Rangetops


Ventilation


Microwaves


Warming Drawers


Coffee Systems


Module Cooktops


Outdoor Grills


Vacuum Seal Drawer


Outdoor Cooking


Wolf Gourmet




COVE



Dishwashers






Looking for manuals or specifications?






Owner Resources





OWNER RESOURCES





Product Registration


Product Information


Accessories


Use and Care Videos


Warranty Information






Recipes


Connected Appliance App


Local Service Providers


Product Support


Owner Technique Guide






Contact Customer Care





We would be happy to assist you.
Call (800) 222-7820








Product Registration


Product Information


Accessories


Use and Care Videos


Warranty Information


Recipes


Connected Appliance App


Local Service Providers


Product Support


Owner Technique Guide






Trade Resources





TRADE RESOURCES





Specification Library


Reveal Cabinet Specs


Installation Videos


Brochure Maker


Mobile Specs App






Trade Shows


Kitchen Design Contest


Future Products


CEUs






Local Showrooms


Local Servicers/Installers






Contact Us





For assistance with trade-specific questions,
call (866) 689-9653








Specification Library


Reveal Cabinet Specs


Installation Videos


Brochure Maker


Mobile Specs App


Trade Shows


Kitchen Design Contest


Future Products


CEUs


Local Showrooms


Local Servicers/Installers






Product Support





PRODUCT SUPPORT





Support Topics


Product Information


Accessories


Local Service Providers


Product Mode Guide






Use and Care Videos


Product Registration


Warranty Information


Connected Appliance App






Contact Customer Care





We would be happy to assist you.
Call (800) 222-7820








Support Topics


Product Information


Accessories


Local Service Providers


Product Mode Guide


Use and Care Videos


Product Registration


Warranty Information


Connected Appliance App






About Us





ABOUT US





The Sub-Zero Story


Company Milestones


Careers


International Sales and Support






Sustainability


Press Room






Contact Customer Care





We would be happy to assist you.
Call (800) 222-7820








The Sub-Zero Story


Company Milestones


Careers


International Sales and Support


Sustainability


Press Room




























An important message regarding product availability.








Home
Wolf








                            Wolf Cooking
                        


                    Friends gathered around a table. Family recipes, lovingly served. And dishes, passed with pride—each one a seared, succulent, or slow-roasted masterpiece. From crusty artisan breads to grilled, glorious steaks, Wolf equips cooks with the confidence to create the meals that the most delicious memories are made of.
                













RANGES












BUILT-IN OVENS












COOKTOPS AND RANGETOPS










VIEW PRODUCTS

Find Installation and Specification Info














                                    Ventilation
                                












                                    Microwaves
                                












                                    Coffee Systems
                                












                                    Module Cooktops
                                












                                    Outdoor Grills
                                












                                    Warming Drawers
                                












                                    Vacuum Seal Drawer
                                









FIND PRODUCTS









From professional kitchens to your home





Craftsmanship. Innovation. Design. Wolf offers a proven, professional kitchen pedigree, the service of a family-owned and -operated company, and pioneering products built and tested to last for over 20 years of predictably delicious dishes.


Wolf designs at the forefront with precision cooking products tested and built to last for over twenty years of daily use and supported by our Madison, Wisconsin-based specialist team.












                        Open your mind to every possibility
                    










Cook with iconic style









Fuel your imagination









Brew your perfect cup









Bring it outdoors









Customize your cooktop









Embrace convection steam




X












VIEW GALLERY 







Request a brochure








To view the complete line of Wolf products, find design inspiration, and learn how Wolf fuels cooking confidence, please request a brochure.


GET MY BROCHURE NOW









Purchase a package and save








                    For a limited time, earn three additional years of protection or a $1,000 rebate with the purchase of a qualifying Sub-Zero and Wolf appliance package.
                

                        For a limited time, earn three additional years of protection or a $1,000 rebate with the purchase of a qualifying Sub-Zero and Wolf appliance package.
                    

LEARN MORE











                            Experience a showroom
                        


                    A visit—in person or virtually—to your nearest showroom is the ideal way to see and experience the complete line of Wolf appliances.
                


























FIND YOUR SHOWROOM












































































 REQUEST A BROCHURE




 

 DISCOVER OUR SHOWROOM




 

 VIEW LIMITED-TIME OFFER
VIEW LIMITED-TIME OFFER




 


 REQUEST A BROCHURE




 

 DISCOVER OUR SHOWROOM




 

 VIEW LIMITED-TIME OFFER




 









OWNER RESOURCES
TRADE RESOURCES
PRODUCT SUPPORT
LOCATOR
ABOUT US
CAREERS
MY ACCOUNT
MY FAVORITES
BUY ACCESSORIES
PRODUCT REGISTRATION
PROMOTIONS
KITCHEN DESIGN GALLERY
WOLF GOURMET
INTERNATIONAL




SUB-ZERO
WOLF
COVE





























Warranty
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Accessibility Statement
Your California Rights



© Sub-Zero Group, Inc. 2022
































 








African wolf - Wikipedia








































 


African wolf

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about a wolf native to Africa. For the other wolf of Africa, see Ethiopian wolf.
Species of canine native to Africa




African wolfTemporal range: Middle Pleistocene – Recent 0.6-0 Ma





African wolf in Haizer, Algeria


Conservation status


Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:

Animalia


Phylum:

Chordata


Class:

Mammalia


Order:

Carnivora


Family:

Canidae


Genus:

Canis


Species:

C. lupaster


Binomial name


Canis lupasterHemprich and Ehrenberg, 1832[1]


Subspecies



C. l. algirensis
C. l. anthus
C. l. bea
C. l. lupaster
C. l. riparius
C. l. soudanicus





Synonyms



Canis anthus F. Cuvier, 1820[2]



The African wolf (Canis lupaster) or golden wolf, formerly known as the African golden jackal, is a canine native to North Africa, West Africa, the Sahel, northern East Africa, and the Horn of Africa. It is listed as least concern on the IUCN Red List.[1] In the Middle Atlas in Morocco, it was sighted in elevations as high as 1,800 m (5,900 ft).[3] It is primarily a predator of invertebrates and mammals as large as gazelle fawns, though larger animals are sometimes taken. Its diet also includes animal carcasses, human refuse, and fruit. The African wolf is a monogamous and territorial species; offspring remain with the family to assist in raising their parents' younger pups.[4]
It was previously classified as an African variant of the golden jackal (Canis aureus), with at that time at least one subspecies (C. a. lupaster) having been classified as a wolf. In 2015, a series of analyses on the species' mitochondrial DNA and nuclear genome demonstrated that it was, in fact, distinct from the golden jackal, and more closely related to the gray wolf and the coyote (Canis latrans).[5][6] It is nonetheless still close enough to the golden jackal to produce hybrid offspring, as indicated through genetic tests on jackals in Israel,[5] and a 19th-century captive crossbreeding experiment.[7] Further studies demonstrated that it is the descendant of a genetically admixed canid of 72% gray wolf (Canis lupus) and 28% Ethiopian wolf (Canis simensis) ancestry.[8]
It plays a prominent role in some African cultures; it was considered sacred in ancient Egypt, particularly in Lycopolis, where it was venerated as a god. In North African folklore, it is viewed as an untrustworthy animal whose body parts can be used for medicinal or ritualistic purposes,[9][10][11] while it is held in high esteem in Senegal's Serer religion as being the first creature to be created by the god Roog.[12]

Contents

1 Local and indigenous names
2 Description
3 Taxonomy

3.1 Early writings
3.2 21st-century discoveries
3.3 Admixture with other Canis species
3.4 Relationship to the Himalayan wolf
3.5 Subspecies


4 Behavior

4.1 Social and reproductive behaviors
4.2 Communication
4.3 Hunting behavior


5 Ecology

5.1 Distribution and habitat
5.2 Diet
5.3 Enemies and competitors


6 In culture
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links


Local and indigenous names[edit]


Linguistic group or area
Indigenous name


Afar
Wucharia[13]


Amazigh
Ouchan asian [14]Ouchan akhatar [14]


Amharic
ተረ ቀበሮ (Tera kebero)[15]


Arabic
ابن آوى (Ibn awa)[16]


Fula
𞤧𞤵𞤲'𞤣𞤵 Sundu[15]


Hausa
Kyarkeci[15]


Somali
Eey


Songhai
Nzongo[15]


Swahili (standard)Swahili (Tanzania)
Bweha wa mbuga[17]Bweha dhahabu[15]


Tigrinya
ቡኳርያ (bukharya)[18]


Wolof
Tili[15]

Description[edit]
 Skull
The African wolf is intermediate in size between the African jackals (L. mesomelas and L. adustus) and the small subspecies of gray wolves,[19] with both sexes weighing 7–15 kg (15–33 lb), and standing 40 cm in height.[4] There is however a high degree of size variation geographically, with Western and Northern African specimens being larger than their East African cousins.[19] It has a relatively long snout and ears, while the tail is comparatively short, measuring 20 cm in length. Fur color varies individually, seasonally and geographically, though the typical coloration is yellowish to silvery grey, with slightly reddish limbs and black speckling on the tail and shoulders. The throat, abdomen and facial markings are usually white, and the eyes are amber-colored. Females bear two to four pairs of teats.[4] Although superficially similar to the golden jackal (particularly in East Africa), the African wolf has a more pointed muzzle and sharper, more robust teeth.[5] The ears are longer in the African wolf, and the skull has a more elevated forehead.[20]

Various C. lupaster phenotypes, ranging from gracile jackal-like morphs to more robust wolf-like ones.

Taxonomy[edit]
Early writings[edit]
Aristotle wrote of wolves living in Egypt, mentioning that they were smaller than the Greek kind. Georg Ebers wrote of the wolf being among the sacred animals of Egypt, describing it as a "smaller variety" of wolf to those of Europe, and noting how the name Lykopolis, the Ancient Egyptian city dedicated to Anubis, means "city of the wolf".[21][22]
The African wolf was first recognised as being a separate species from the golden jackal by Frédéric Cuvier in 1820, who described it as being a more elegant animal, with a more melodic voice and a less strong odour. The binomial name he chose for it was derived from the Arcadian Anthus family described by Pliny the Elder in his Natural History, whose members would draw lots to become werewolves.[2] Eduard Rüppell proposed that the animal was the ancestor of Egyptian sighthounds, and named it Wolfs-hund (wolf dog),[23] while C.H. Smith named it "thoa" or "thous dog".[24]

 Illustration of golden jackal-African wolf hybrids bred in captivity (1821).
An attempt was also made in 1821 to hybridise the two species in captivity, resulting in the birth of five pups, three of which died before weaning. The two survivors were noted to never play with each other, and had completely contrasting temperaments: One pup inherited the golden jackal's shyness, while the other was affectionate toward its human captors.[7] English biologist G.J. Mivart emphasized the differences between the African wolf and the golden jackal in his writings:


... it is a nice question whether the Common Jackal of North Africa should or should not be regarded as of the same species [as the golden jackal] ... Certainly the differences of coloration which exist between these forms are not nearly so great as those which are to be found to occur between the different local varieties of C. lupus. We are nevertheless inclined ... to keep the North-African and Indian Jackals distinct ... The reason why we prefer to keep them provisionally distinct is that though the difference between the two forms (African and Indian) is slight as regards coloration, yet it appears to be a very constant one. Out of seventeen skins of the Indian form, we have only found one which is wanting in the main characteristic as to difference of hue. The ears also are relatively shorter than in the North-African form. But there is another character to which we attach greater weight. However much the different races of Wolves differ in size, we have not succeeded in finding any constant distinctive characters in the form of the skull or the proportions of the lobes of any of the teeth. So far as we have been able to observe, such differences do exist between the Indian and North-African Jackals.— Mivart (1890)[25]
 Comparative illustration of C. aureus (top) and C. lupaster (bottom).
The canids present in Egypt in particular were noted to be so much more gray wolf-like than populations elsewhere in Africa that W.F. Hemprich and C.G. Ehrenberg gave them the binomial name Canis lupaster in 1832. Likewise, T.H. Huxley, upon noting the similarities between the skulls of lupaster and Indian wolves, classed the animal as a subspecies of the gray wolf. However, the animal was subsequently synonymised with the golden jackal by Ernst Schwarz in 1926.
In 1965, the Finnish paleontologist Björn Kurtén wrote:

The taxonomy of the Jackals in the Near East is still a matter of dispute. On the basis of skeletal material, however, it can be stated that the Wolf Jackal is specifically distinct from the much smaller Golden Jackal.[26]
In 1981, zoologist Walter Ferguson argued in favor of lupaster being a subspecies of the gray wolf based on cranial measurements, stating that the classing of the animal as a jackal was based solely on the animal's small size, and predated the discovery of C. l. arabs, which is intermediate in size between C. l. lupus and lupaster.[22]

21st-century discoveries[edit]


Phylogenetic tree of the wolf-like canids with timing in millions of years[a]






Caninae 3.5 Ma





3.0





2.5





2.0





0.96





0.6





0.38





 





 





 


Domestic dog 



 


 


Gray wolf 



 



 



 


 


Coyote 



 



 


0.11





 


African wolf: northwestern Africa



 


 


African wolf: eastern Africa



 



 



 


 


Golden jackal 



 



 


 


Ethiopian wolf 



 



 


 


Dhole 



 



 


 


African wild dog 



 



 


 





2.6





 


Side-striped jackal 



 


 


Black-backed jackal 



 



 



 



 



Further doubts over its being conspecific with the golden jackal of Eurasia arose in December 2002, when a canid was sighted in Eritrea's Danakil Desert whose appearance did not correspond to that of the golden jackal or the six other recognized species of the area, but strongly resembled that of the gray wolf. The area had previously been largely unexplored because of its harsh climate and embroilment in the Eritrean War of Independence and subsequent Eritrean–Ethiopian War, though local Afar tribesmen knew of the animal, and referred to it as wucharia (wolf).[13]
The animal's wolf-like qualities were confirmed in 2011, when several golden "jackal" populations in Egypt and the Horn of Africa classed as Canis aureus lupaster[19] were found to have mtDNA sequences more closely resembling those found in gray wolves than those of golden jackals.[21] These wolf-like mtDNA sequences were found to occur over a 6,000 km wide area, encompassing Algeria, Mali and Senegal. Furthermore, the sampled African specimens displayed much more nucleotide and haplotype diversity than that present in Indian and Himalayan wolves, thus indicating a larger ancestral population, and an effective extant population of around 80,000 females. Both these studies proposed reclassifying Canis aureus lupaster as a subspecies of the gray wolf.[27]
In 2015, a more thorough comparative study of mitochondrial and nuclear genomes on a larger sample of wolf-like African canids from northern, eastern and western Africa showed that they were in fact all distinct from the golden jackal, with a genetic divergence of around 6.7%,[5][28][29] which is greater than that between gray wolves and coyotes (4%) and that between gray wolves and domestic dogs (0.2%).[30] Furthermore, the study showed that these African wolf-like canids (renamed Canis lupaster, or African wolves) were more closely related to gray wolves and coyotes than to golden jackals,[5][31] and that C. l. lupaster merely represents a distinct phenotype of the African wolf rather than an actual gray wolf. The phylogenetic tree below is based on nuclear sequences:[5]
It was estimated that the African wolf diverged from the wolf–coyote clade 1.0–1.7 million years ago, during the Pleistocene, and therefore its superficial similarity to the golden jackal (particularly in East Africa, where African wolves are similar in size to golden jackals) would be a case of parallel evolution. Considering its phylogenetic position and the canid fossil record, it is likely that the African wolf evolved from larger ancestors that became progressively more jackal-like in size upon populating Africa on account of interspecific competition with both larger and smaller indigenous carnivores. Traces of African wolf DNA were identified in golden jackals in Israel, which adjoins Egypt, thus indicating the presence of a hybrid zone.[5] The study's findings were corroborated that same year by Spanish, Mexican and Moroccan scientists analyzing the mtDNA of wolves in Morocco, who found that the specimens analyzed were distinct from both golden jackals and gray wolves but bore a closer relationship to the latter.[6] Studies on RAD sequences found instances of African wolves hybridizing with both feral dogs and Ethiopian wolves.[32]
In 2017, it was proposed by scientists at the Oslo and Helsinki Universities that the binomial name C. anthus was a nomen dubium, on account of the fact that Cuvier's 1820 description of the holotype, a female collected from Senegal, seems to be describing the side-striped jackal rather than the actual African wolf, and does not match the appearance of a male specimen described by Cuvier in his later writings. This ambiguity, coupled with the disappearance of the holotype's remains, led to the scientists proposing giving priority to Hemprich and Ehrenberg's name C. lupaster, due to the type specimen having a more detailed and consistent description, and its remains being still examinable at the Museum für Naturkunde.[19] The following year, a major genetic study of Canis species also referred to the African wolf as Canis lupaster.[8]
In 2019, a workshop hosted by the IUCN/SSC Canid Specialist Group recommended that because the specimen identified as Canis anthus Cuvier, 1820 was uncertain, the species should be known as Canis lupaster Hemprich and Ehrenberg, 1832 until Canis anthus can be validated.[33]

Admixture with other Canis species[edit]
In 2018, whole genome sequencing was used to compare members of the genus Canis. The study supports the African wolf being distinct from the golden jackal, and with the Ethiopian wolf being genetically basal to both. Two genetically distinct African wolf populations exist in northwestern and eastern Africa. This suggests that Ethiopian wolves – or a close and extinct relative – once had a much larger range within Africa to admix with other canids. There is evidence of gene flow between the eastern population and the Ethiopian wolf, which has led to the eastern population being distinct from the northwestern population. The common ancestor of both African wolf populations was a genetically admixed canid of 72% gray wolf and 28% Ethiopian wolf ancestry. There is evidence of gene flow between African wolves,  golden jackals, and gray wolves. One African wolf from the Egyptian Sinai Peninsula showed high admixture with the Middle Eastern gray wolves and dogs, highlighting the role of the land bridge between the African and other continents in canid evolution. African wolves form a sister clade to Middle Eastern gray wolves based on mitochondrial DNA, but to coyotes and gray wolves based on nuclear DNA.[8]

Relationship to the Himalayan wolf[edit]
Between 2011 and 2015, two mtDNA studies found that the Himalayan wolf and Indian wolf were closer to the African wolf than they were to the Holarctic gray wolf.[21][5] In 2017, a study of mitochondrial DNA, X-chromosome (maternal lineage) markers and Y-chromosome (male lineage) markers found that the Himalayan wolf is genetically basal to the Holarctic gray wolf. The Himalayan wolf shares a maternal lineage with the African wolf, and possesses a unique paternal lineage that falls between the gray wolf and the African wolf.[34]

Subspecies[edit]
Although in the past several attempts have been made to synonymise many of the proposed names, the taxonomic position of West African wolves, in particular, is too confused to come to any precise conclusion, as the collected study materials are few. Prior to 1840, six of the 10 supposed West African subspecies were named or classed almost entirely because of their fur color.[35]
The species' display of high individual variation, coupled with the scarcity of samples and the lack of physical barriers on the continent preventing gene flow, brings into question the validity of some of the West African forms.[35] However, a study showed that the genetic divergence of all of the African wolves occurred between 50,000 and 10,500 years ago, with most occurring between 30,000 and 16,000 years ago during the Late Glacial Maximum (33,000–16,000 years ago). There were very dry conditions across the Sahara during this period. The study proposes that these wolves were isolated in refugia and therefore isolated for hundreds of generations, leading to genetic divergence.[36]



Subspecies

Trinomial authority

Description

Range

Synonyms


Algerian wolfC. l. algirensis



Wagner, 1841

A dark-colored subspecies, with a tail marked with three dusky rings. It is similar in size to the red fox.[37]

Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia

barbarus (C. E. H. Smith, 1839)
grayi (Hilzheimer, 1906)
tripolitanus (Wagner, 1841)



Senegalese wolfC. l. anthus



F. Cuvier, 1820

Similar to lupaster, but smaller and more lightly built, with paler fur and a sharper muzzle.[37]

Senegal

senegalensis (C. E. H. Smith, 1839)


Serengeti wolfC. l. bea



Heller, 1914

Smaller and lighter-colored than the northern forms.[38]

Kenya, northern Tanzania




Egyptian wolfC. l. lupaster



Hemprich and Ehrenberg, 1833

A large, stoutly built subspecies with proportionately short ears and presenting a very gray wolf-like phenotype, standing 40.6 cm (16.0 in) in shoulder height and 127 cm (50 in) in body length. The upper parts are yellowish-gray tinged with black, while the muzzle, the ears and the outer surfaces of the limbs are reddish-yellow. The fur around the mouth is white.[27][37]

Egypt, Algeria, Mali, Ethiopian Highlands, and Senegal

C. aureus lupaster
C. lupus lupaster
C. lupaster
C. sacer (Hemprich and Ehrenberg, 1833)



Somali wolfC. l. riparius

Hemprich and Ehrenberg, 1832

A dwarf subspecies measuring only 12 inches in shoulder height, it is generally of a grayish-yellow color, mingled with only a small proportion of black. The muzzle and legs are more decidedly yellow, and the underparts are white.[37]

Somalia and the coast of Ethiopia and Eritrea

hagenbecki (Noack, 1897)
mengesi (Noack, 1897)
somalicus (Lorenz, 1906)



Variegated wolfor Nubian wolfC. l. soudanicus



Thomas, 1903

A small subspecies standing 38 cm (15 in) at the shoulder, and measuring 102 cm (40 in) in length. The fur is generally pale stone-buff, with blotches of black.[37]

Sudan and Somalia

doederleini (Hilzheimer, 1906)
nubianus (Cabrera, 1921)
thooides (Hilzheimer, 1906)
variegatus (Cretzschmar, 1826)


Behavior[edit]
Social and reproductive behaviors[edit]
The African wolf's social organisation is extremely flexible, varying according to the availability and distribution of food. The basic social unit is a breeding pair, followed by its current offspring, or offspring from previous litters staying as "helpers".[15] Large groups are rare, and have only been recorded to occur in areas with abundant human waste. Family relationships among African wolves are comparatively peaceful in relation to those of the black-backed jackal; although the sexual and territorial behavior of grown pups is suppressed by the breeding pair, they are not actively driven off once they attain adulthood. African wolves also lie together and groom each other much more frequently than black-backed jackals. In the Serengeti, pairs defend permanent territories encompassing 2–4 km2, and will vacate their territories only to drink or when lured by a large carcass.[4] The pair patrols and marks its territory in tandem. Both partners and helpers will react aggressively towards intruders, though the greatest aggression is reserved for intruders of the same sex; pair members do not assist each other in repelling intruders of the opposite sex.[4]

 Threat postures in C. l. lupaster (left) and C. l. anthus (right)
The African wolf's courtship rituals are remarkably long, during which the breeding pair remains almost constantly together. Prior to mating, the pair patrols and scent marks its territory. Copulation is preceded by the female holding her tail out and angled in such a way that her genitalia are exposed. The two approach each other, whimpering, lifting their tails and bristling their fur, displaying varying intensities of offensive and defensive behavior. The female sniffs and licks the male's genitals, whilst the male nuzzles the female's fur. They may circle each other and fight briefly. The copulatory tie lasts roughly four minutes. Towards the end of estrus, the pair drifts apart, with the female often approaching the male in a comparatively more submissive manner. In anticipation of the role he will take in raising pups, the male regurgitates or surrenders any food he has to the female. In the Serengeti, pups are born in December–January, and begin eating solid food after a month. Weaning starts at the age of two months, and ends at four months. At this stage, the pups are semi-independent, venturing up to 50 meters from the den, even sleeping in the open. Their playing behavior becomes increasingly more aggressive, with the pups competing for rank, which is established after six months. The female feeds the pups more frequently than the male or helpers do, though the presence of the latter allows the breeding pair to leave the den and hunt without leaving the litter unprotected.[4]
The African wolf's life centers around a home burrow, which usually consists of an abandoned and modified aardvark or warthog earth. The interior structure of this burrow is poorly understood, though it is thought to consist of a single central chamber with 2–3 escape routes. The home burrow can be located in both secluded areas or surprisingly near the dens of other predators.[39]

Communication[edit]
African wolves frequently groom one another, particularly during courtship, during which it can last up to 30 minutes. Nibbling of the face and neck is observed during greeting ceremonies. When fighting, the African wolf slams its opponents with its hips, and bites and shakes the shoulder. The species' postures are typically canine, and it has more facial mobility than the black-backed and side-striped jackals, being able to expose its canine teeth like a dog.[4]
The vocabulary of the African wolf is similar to that of the domestic dog, with seven sounds having been recorded.[17] The African wolf's vocalizations include howls, barks, growls, whines and cackles.[4] Subspecies can be recognised by differences in their howls.[17] One of the most commonly heard sounds is a high, keening wail, of which there are three varieties; a long single toned continuous howl, a wail that rises and falls, and a series of short, staccato howls. These howls are used to repel intruders and attract family members. Howling in chorus is thought to reinforce family bonds and establish territorial status.[4] A comparative analysis of African wolf and some gray wolf subspecies' howls demonstrated that the former's howls bear similarities to those of the Indian wolf, being high-pitched and of relatively short duration.[40]

Hunting behavior[edit]
 A Serengeti wolf (C. l. bea) navigating through a herd of blue wildebeest in the Ngorongoro National Park, Tanzania
The African wolf rarely catches hares, due to their speed. Gazelle mothers (often working in groups of two or three) are formidable when defending their young against single wolves, which are much more successful in hunting gazelle fawns when working in pairs. A pair of wolves will methodically search for concealed gazelle fawns within herds, tall grass, bushes and other likely hiding places.[4]
Although it is known to kill animals up to three times its own weight, the African wolf targets mammalian prey much less frequently than the black-backed jackal overall.[4] On capturing large prey, the African wolf makes no attempt to kill it; instead it rips open the belly and eats the entrails. Small prey is typically killed by shaking, though snakes may be eaten alive from the tail end. The African wolf often carries away more food than it can consume, and caches the surplus, which is generally recovered within 24 hours.[39] When foraging for insects, the African wolf turns over dung piles to find dung beetles. During the dry seasons, it excavates dung balls to reach the larvae inside. Grasshoppers and flying termites are caught either in mid-air or by pouncing on them while they are on the ground. It is fiercely intolerant of other scavengers, having been known to dominate vultures on kills – one can hold dozens of vultures at bay by threatening, snapping and lunging at them.[4]

Ecology[edit]
Distribution and habitat[edit]
C. lupaster has a wide range across the upper half of Africa, occurring in Senegal, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Western Sahara, Nigeria, Chad, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Kenya, Egypt, and Tanzania. Fossil finds dating back to the Pleistocene indicate that the species' range was not always restricted to Africa, with remains having been found in the Levant and Saudi Arabia.[19] In Tanzania, the African wolf is limited to a small area of the north between the western slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro and the centre of the Serengeti. In the latter area, it occurs mostly in the short-grass plains, the floor of the Ngorongoro Crater, and the plains between the Olmoti and Empakai Craters, being relatively rare in Serengeti National Park, Loliondo and the Maswa game reserve. The species also inhabits the Lake Natron area and West Kilimanjaro. It is sometimes found in the northern part of Arusha National Park, and as far south as Manyara. In areas where it is common, such as the short-grass plains of Serengeti National Park and the Ngorongoro Crater, population densities can range between 0.5 and 1.5 specimens per km2. A population decrease of 60% has been recorded in the southern plains of Serengeti National Park since the early 1970s, though the reasons are unknown.[41]
The African wolf inhabits a number of different habitats; in Algeria it lives in Mediterranean, coastal and hilly areas (including hedged farmlands, scrublands, pinewoods and oak forests), while populations in Senegal inhabit tropical, semi-arid climate zones including Sahelian savannahs. Wolf populations in Mali have been documented in arid Sahelian massifs.[27] In Egypt, the African wolf inhabits agricultural areas, wastelands, desert margins, rocky areas, and cliffs. At Lake Nasser, it lives close to the lakeshore.[16] In 2012, African wolves were photographed in Morocco's Azilal Province at an elevation of 1,800 meters.[14][3] It apparently does well in areas where human density is high and natural prey populations low, as is the case in the Enderta district in northern Ethiopia.[42] This wolf has been reported in the very dry Danakil Depression desert on the coast of Eritrea, in eastern Africa.[43]

Diet[edit]
 Serengeti wolf (C. l. bea) eating an agama
In West Africa, the African wolf mostly confines itself to small prey, such as hares, rats, ground squirrels and cane rats. Other prey items include lizards, snakes, and ground-nesting birds, such as francolins and bustards. It also consumes a large amount of insects, including dung beetles, larvae, termites and grasshoppers. It will also kill young gazelles, duikers and warthogs.[39] In East Africa, it consumes invertebrates and fruit, though 60% of its diet consists of rodents, lizards, snakes, birds, hares and Thomson's gazelles.[15] During the wildebeest calving season, African wolves will feed almost exclusively on their afterbirth.[17] In the Serengeti and Ngorongoro Crater, less than 20% of its diet comes from scavenging.[4] In Senegal, where both C. l. anthus and C. l. lupaster coexist, some degree of niche segregation is apparent in their choice of prey; the former is reputed to feed primarily on lambs, whereas the latter attacks larger prey, such as sheep, goats and cattle.[27]

Enemies and competitors[edit]
The African wolf generally manages to avoid competing with black-backed and side-striped jackals by occupying a different habitat (grassland, as opposed to the closed and open woodlands favored by the latter two species) and being more active during the daytime.[44] Nevertheless, the African wolf has been known to kill the pups of black-backed jackals,[15] but has in turn been observed to be dominated by adults during disputes over carcasses.[17] It often eats alongside African wild dogs, and will stand its ground if the dogs try to harass it.[4] Encounters with Ethiopian wolves are usually antagonistic, with Ethiopian wolves dominating African wolves if the latter enter their territories, and vice versa. Although African wolves are inefficient rodent hunters and thus not in direct competition with Ethiopian wolves, it is likely that heavy human persecution prevents the former from attaining numbers large enough to completely displace the latter.[45] Nevertheless, there is at least one record of an African wolf pack adopting a male Ethiopian wolf.[46]
African wolves will feed alongside spotted hyenas, though they will be chased if they approach too closely. Spotted hyenas will sometimes follow wolves during the gazelle fawning season, as wolves are effective at tracking and catching young animals. Hyenas do not take to eating wolf flesh readily; four hyenas were reported to take half an hour in eating one. Overall, the two animals typically ignore each other when no food or young is at stake.[47] Wolves will confront a hyena approaching too closely to their dens by taking turns in biting the hyena's hocks until it retreats.[4]
African wolves in the Serengeti are known to carry the canine parvovirus, canine herpesvirus, canine coronavirus and canine adenovirus.[15]

In culture[edit]
Main article: Wolves in folklore, religion and mythology
 Wolf-shaped bronze amulet from Egypt's Ptolemaic Period (711–30 BCE)
The wolf was the template of numerous Ancient Egyptian deities, including Anubis, Wepwawet and Duamutef.[48] The wolf was sacred in Lycopolis, whose inhabitants would mummify wolves and store them in chambers, as opposed to other areas of Egypt, where wolves were buried at their place of death. According to Diodorus Siculus in Bibliotheca historica, there were two reasons as to why the wolf was held in such high regard, the first being the animal's affinity to the dog, and the second being a legend that told of how Lycopolis received its name after a pack of wolves repelled an Ethiopian invasion. Plutarch noted in his On the Worship of Isis and Osiris that Lycopolis was the only nome in Egypt where people consumed sheep, as the practice was associated with the wolf, which was revered as a god. The importance of the wolf in Lycopolite culture continued through to the Roman period, where images of the animal were minted on the reverse sides of coins. Herodotus mockingly wrote of a festival commemorating Rhampsinit's descent to the underworld where a priest would be lead by two wolves to the temple of Ceres.[49]
Arab Egyptian folklore holds that the wolf can cause chickens to faint from fear by simply passing underneath their roosts, and associates its body parts with various forms of folk magic: placing a wolf's tongue in a house is believed to cause the inhabitants to argue, and its meat is thought to be useful in treating insanity and epilepsy. Its heart is believed to protect the bearer from wild animal attacks, while its eye can protect against the evil eye.[9] Although considered haram in Islamic dietary laws, the wolf is important in Moroccan folk medicine.[10] Edvard Westermarck wrote of several remedies derived from the wolf in Morocco, including the use of its fat as a lotion, the consumption of its meat to treat respiratory ailments, and the burning of its intestines in fumigation rituals meant to increase the fertility of married couples. The wolf's gall bladder was said to have various uses, including curing sexual impotence and serving as a charm for women wishing to divorce their husbands. Westermarck noted, however, that the wolf was also associated with more nefarious qualities: it was said that a child who eats wolf flesh before reaching puberty will be forever cursed with misfortune and that scribes and saintly persons refrain from consuming it even in areas where it is socially acceptable, as doing so would render their charms useless.[11]
The African wolf is not common in Neolithic rock art, though it does occasionally appear; a definite portrayal is shown on the Kef Messiouer cave in Algeria's Tébessa Province, where it is shown feeding on a wild boar carcass alongside a lion pride. It plays a role in Berber mythology, particularly that of the Ait Seghrouchen of Morocco, where it plays a similar role in folktales as the red fox does in Medieval European fables, though it is often the victim of the more cunning hedgehog.[50]
The African wolf plays a prominent role in the Serer religion's creation myth, where it is viewed as the first living creature created by Roog, the Supreme God and Creator.[12][51] In one aspect, it can be viewed as an Earth-diver sent to Earth by Roog, in another, as a fallen prophet for disobeying the laws of the divine. The wolf was the first intelligent creature on Earth, and it is believed that it will remain on Earth after human beings have returned to the divine. The Serers believe that, not only does it know in advance who will die, but it traces the tracks in advance of those who will go to funerals. The movements of the wolf are carefully observed, because the animal is viewed as a seer who came from the transcendence and maintains links with it. Although believed to be rejected in the bush by other animals and deprived of its original intelligence, it is still respected because it dared to resist the supreme being who still keeps it alive.[12]

See also[edit]
Ethiopian wolf

Notes[edit]


^ For a full set of supporting references refer to the note (a) in the phylotree at Evolution of the wolf#Wolf-like canids


References[edit]


^ a b c Hoffmann, M. & Atickem, A. (2019). "Canis lupaster". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2019: e.T118264888A118265889. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2019-1.RLTS.T118264888A118265889.en. Retrieved 19 November 2021.

^ a b Cuvier, F. (1824). "Le Chacal du Sénégal" [The Senegalese jackal]. Histoire naturelle des mammifères (in French). Vol. Tome 2. Paris, FR: A. Belin. pp. 34–36 – via Internet Archive (archive.org).

^ a b (in Spanish) Moliner, V. U., Ramírez, C., Gallardo, M. & Idrissi, H. R. (2012), "Detectan el lobo en Marruecos gracias al uso del foto-trampeo", Quercus, 319:14–15, ISSN 0212-0054

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Estes, R. (1992). The behavior guide to African mammals: including hoofed mammals, carnivores, primates. University of California Press. pp. 398–404. ISBN 0-520-08085-8.

^ a b c d e f g h Koepfli, K.-P.; Pollinger, J.; Godinho, R.; Robinson, J.; Lea, A.; Hendricks, S.; Schweizer, R.M.; Thalmann, O.; Silva, P.; Fan, Z.; Yurchenko, A.A.; Dobrynin, P.; Makunin, A.; Cahill, J.A.; Shapiro, B.; Álvares, F.; Brito, J.C.; Geffen, E.; Leonard, J.A.; Helgen, K.M.; Johnson, W.E.; O'Brien, S.J.; van Valkenburgh, B.; Wayne, R.K. (2015). "Genome-wide evidence reveals that African and Eurasian golden jackals are distinct species". Current Biology. 25 (16): 2158–2165. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.06.060. PMID 26234211.

^ a b (in Spanish) Urios, Vicente; Donat-Torres, Maria P.; Ramírez, Carlos; Monroy-Vilchis, Octavio; Hamid Rgribi-Idrissi (2015): El análisis del genoma mitocondrial del cánido estudiado en Marruecos manifiesta que no es ni lobo (Canis lupus) ni chacal euroasiático (Canis aureus). figshare.
 doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.1524971

^ a b Cuvier, F. (1824). Histoire naturelle des mammifères [Natural History of the Mammals] (in French). Vol. tome 3. Paris, FR: Chez A. Belin – via Internet Archive (archive.org).

^ a b c Gopalakrishnan, Shyam; Sinding, Mikkel-Holger S.; Ramos-Madrigal, Jazmín; Niemann, Jonas; Samaniego Castruita, Jose A.; Vieira, Filipe G.; Carøe, Christian; de Montero, Marc Manuel; Kuderna, Lukas; Serres, Aitor; González-Basallote, Víctor Manuel; Liu, Yan-Hu; Wang, Guo-Dong; Marques-Bonet, Tomas; Mirarab, Siavash; Fernandes, Carlos; Gaubert, Philippe; Koepfli, Klaus-Peter; Budd, Jane; Rueness, Eli Knispel; Heide-Jørgensen, Mads Peter; Petersen, Bent; Sicheritz-Ponten, Thomas; Bachmann, Lutz; Wiig, Øystein; Hansen, Anders J.; Gilbert, M. Thomas P. (2018). "Interspecific gene flow shaped the evolution of the genus Canis". Current Biology. 28 (21): 3441–3449.e5. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.08.041. PMC 6224481. PMID 30344120.

^ a b Osborn, D. & Helmy, I. (1980). "Canis aureus lupaster (Hemprich and Ehrenberg, 1833)". The contemporary land mammals of Egypt (including Sinai). Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History. pp. 360–371.

^ a b Bidwell, M.; Bidwell, R. (2005). The Traveller's Companion (Second ed.). Tauris Parke Paperbacks. ISBN 1845111079.

^ a b Westermarck, E. (2013). Ritual and Belief in Morocco. Vol. II. Routledge Revivals. ISBN 978-1317912613.

^ a b c Gravrand, H. (1990). "La Civilisation Sereer – Pangool". Les Nouvelles Editions Africaines du Senegal (in French). Vol. 2. pp. 201–203. ISBN 2-7236-1055-1.

^ a b Tiwari, J. K.; Sillero-Zubiri, C. (2004). "Unidentified Canid in Horn of Africa" (PDF). Canid News. 7: 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2015-08-13.

^ a b c (in French) Rachid Tarik, "Le loup apparaît dans la région d'Azilal", Le Matin (April 29, 2013)

^ a b c d e f g h i j Jhala, Y. V. & Moehlman, P. D. 2004. Golden jackal Canis aureus Archived 2007-10-12 at the Wayback Machine. In Sillero-Zubiri, C., Hoffman, M. & MacDonald, D. W., ed., Canids: Foxes, Wolves, Jackals and Dogs – 2004 Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan, 156–161. IUCN/SSC Canid Specialist Group, ISBN 2-8317-0786-2

^ a b Hoath, R. (2009). A Field Guide to the Mammals of Egypt. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press. pp. 70–73. ISBN 978-9774162541.

^ a b c d e Kingdon, J. (1988). "East African mammals: an atlas of evolution in Africa, Volume 3, Part 1". University of Chicago Press. p. 18–22. ISBN 0-226-43721-3.

^ Aerts, R. (2019). "Forest and woodland vegetation in the highlands of Dogu'a Tembien".  In Nyssen J.; Jacob, M.; Frankl, A. (eds.). Geo-trekking in Ethiopia's Tropical Mountains – The Dogu'a Tembien District. GeoGuide. Cham: SpringerNature. pp. 233–250. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-04955-3_15. ISBN 978-3-030-04954-6. S2CID 199103486.

^ a b c d e Viranta, Suvi; Atickem, Anagaw; Werdelin, Lars; Stenseth, Nils Chr. (2017). "Rediscovering a forgotten canid species". BMC Zoology. 2. doi:10.1186/s40850-017-0015-0.

^ Mivart, G. (1890). "The Nort-African Jackal". Dogs, Jackals, Wolves and Foxes: A Monograph of the Canidæ. London: R.H. Porter. pp. 41–43.

^ a b c Rueness, Eli Knispel; Asmyhr, Maria Gulbrandsen; Sillero-Zubiri, Claudio; MacDonald, David W.; Bekele, Afework; Atickem, Anagaw; Stenseth, Nils C. (2011). "The cryptic African wolf: Canis aureus lupaster is not a golden jackal and is not endemic to Egypt". PLOS ONE. 6 (1): e16385. Bibcode:2011PLoSO...616385R. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016385. PMC 3027653. PMID 21298107.

^ a b Ferguson, W.W. (1981). "The systematic of Canis aureus lupaster (Carnivora : Canidae) and the occurrence of Canis lupus in North Africa, Egypt, and Sinai". Mammalia. 45 (4): 459–465. doi:10.1515/mamm.1981.45.4.459. S2CID 86455216.

^ Rüppell, E. (1826). "Canis anthus" [Harrier dog]. Atlas zu der Reise im nördlichen Afrika [Atlas of a Voyage through Northern Africa] (in German). Frankfurt am Main: Senckenbergische Naturforschende Gesellschaft. pp. 44–46 – via Internet Archive (archive.org).

^ Smith, C.H.; Jardine, W. (1839). The Natural History of Dogs. Vol. I. Edinburgh, UK: W.H. Lizars. pp. 193–194 – via Internet Archive (archive.org). Canidae or genus Canis of authors; including also the genera hyaena and proteles

^ Mivart, G.J. (1890). Dogs, Jackals, Wolves and Foxes: A monograph of the Canidæ. London, UK: R.H. Porter. pp. 36–37 – via Internet Archive (archive.org).

^ Kurtén, B. (1965). "The Carnivora of the Palestine Caves". Acta Zoologica Fennica. Societas pro fauna et flora Fennica (107): 41. hdl:10138/37761.

^ a b c d Gaubert P, Bloch C, Benyacoub S, Abdelhamid A, Pagani P,  et al. (2012). "Reviving the African Wolf Canis lupus lupaster in North and West Africa: A Mitochondrial Lineage Ranging More than 6,000 km Wide". PLOS ONE. 7 (8): e42740. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...742740G. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0042740. PMC 3416759. PMID 22900047.

^ Lewis, M.E. (2017). "Chapter 2 – Carnivore guilds and hominim dispersals".  In Boivin, Nicole; Crassard, Rémy; Petraglia, Michael (eds.). Human Dispersal and Species Movement. Cambridge University Press. p. 52. ISBN 9781107164147.

^ "Canis anthus (F. Cuvier, 1820)". Integrated Taxonomic Information System (itis.gov). U.S. Geological Survey. Retrieved 8 November 2017.

^ Wayne, Robert K. (1993). "Molecular evolution of the dog family". Trends in Genetics. 9 (6): 218–224. doi:10.1016/0168-9525(93)90122-X. PMID 8337763.

^ Zachos, Frank E. (2016). "Chapter 6 – Species delimitations". Species Concepts in Biology: Historical development, theoretical foundations, and practical relevance. Springer. p. 158. ISBN 9783319449647.

^ Bahlk, S. H. (2015). Can hybridization be detected between African wolf and sympatric canids? . Master of Science Thesis. Center for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis Department of Bioscience Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Science, University of Oslo, Norway

^ Alvares, Francisco; Bogdanowicz, Wieslaw; Campbell, Liz A.D.; Godinho, Rachel; Hatlauf, Jennifer; Jhala, Yadvendradev V.; Kitchener, Andrew C.; Koepfli, Klaus-Peter; Krofel, Miha; Moehlman, Patricia D.; Senn, Helen; Sillero-Zubiri, Claudio; Viranta, Suvi; Werhahn, Geraldine (28–30 May 2019). Workshop conclusions and recommendations (PDF). Old World Canis spp. with taxonomic ambiguity: CIBIO. Vairão, Portugal: IUCN/SSC Canid Specialist Group. Retrieved 6 March 2020 – via canids.org/CBC.

^ Werhahn, G.; Senn, H.; Kaden, J.; Joshi, J.; Bhattarai, S.; Kusi, N.; Sillero-Zubiri, C.; MacDonald, D.W. (2017). "Phylogenetic evidence for the ancient Himalayan wolf: Towards a clarification of its taxonomic status based on genetic sampling from western Nepal". Royal Society Open Science. 4 (6): 170186. Bibcode:2017RSOS....470186W. doi:10.1098/rsos.170186. PMC 5493914. PMID 28680672.

^ a b Rosevear, Donovan Reginald (1974). "The carnivores of West Africa". London : Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). pp. 38–44. ISBN 1-175-10030-7.

^ Sarabia, Carlos; Vonholdt, Bridgett; Larrasoaña, Juan C.; Uríos, Vicente; Leonard, Jennifer A. (2021). "Pleistocene climate fluctuations drove demographic history of African wolves ( Ca nis lupaster )". Molecular Ecology. 30 (23): 6101–6120. doi:10.1111/mec.15784. hdl:10045/114701. PMID 33372365. S2CID 229715430.

^ a b c d e Lydekker, Richard (1908). "The Game Animals of Africa". London, R. Ward, limited. pp. 459–461

^ Heller, E. (1914). Four new subspecies of large mammals from equatorial Africa. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, 61, No. 22. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution

^ a b c Rosevear, Donovan Reginald (1974). "The carnivores of West Africa". London : Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). pp. 46–47. ISBN 1-175-10030-7.

^ Hennelly, L.; Habib, B.; Root-Gutteridge, H.; Palacios, V.; Passilongo, D. (2017). "Howl variation across Himalayan, North African, Indian, and Holarctic wolf clades: tracing divergence in the world's oldest wolf lineages using acoustics". Current Zoology. 63 (3): 341–348. doi:10.1093/cz/zox001. PMC 5804178. PMID 29491993.

^ Foley, C. et al. (2014), A Field Guide to the Larger Mammals of Tanzania, Princeton University Press, pp. 102–103, ISBN 1400852803

^ "Densities of spotted hyaena (Crocuta crocuta) and African wolf (Canis lupaster) increase with increasing anthropogenic influence". Mammalian Biology. 85: 60–69. 2017-02-17. doi:10.1016/j.mambio.2017.02.004. hdl:10067/1418230151162165141. S2CID 90177487. Retrieved 2021-02-23.

^ Tiwari, Jugal & Sillero-Zubiri, Claudio (2004). "Unidentified canid in the Danakil desert of Eritrea, Horn of Africa" (PDF). Canid News. 7 (5): 1–3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-10-12. Retrieved 2015-08-13.

^ Fuller, T.K.; Biknevicius, A.R.; Kat, P.W.; Van Valkenburgh, B.; Wayne, R.K. (1989). "The ecology of three sympatric jackal species in the rift valley of kenya". African Journal of Ecology. 27 (4): 313–323. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2028.1989.tb01025.x.

^ Gutema, T. M.,  Foraging ecology and trophic niche overlap between sympatric African wolf and Ethiopian wolf in the Ethiopian Highlands Archived 2016-10-06 at the Wayback Machine, The Rufford Foundation (November 2015)

^ Sillero-Zubiri, C.; Gottelli, D. (1994). "Canis simensis" (PDF). Mammalian Species (485): 1–6. doi:10.2307/3504136. JSTOR 3504136. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-09-24. Retrieved 2015-08-01.

^ Kruuk, H. (1972). The Spotted Hyena: A Study of Predation and Social Behaviour. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-45507-5.

^ Remler, P. (2010). Egyptian Mythology, A to Z. Infobase Publishing. p. 99. ISBN 978-1438131801.

^ Wilkinson, J. G. (1847). The Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians. Vol. 5. John Murray.

^ Trécolle, G.; Camps, G. (1993). "Chacal". Encyclopédie Berbère. Aix-en-Provence: Capsa – Cheval. 12 (12): 1857–1859. doi:10.4000/encyclopedieberbere.2099.

^ Thiaw, Issa laye (2009). "Mythe de la création du monde selon les sages sereer; Plaidoyer pour le dialogue interreligieux". Enracinement et Ouverture (in French). Dakar: Konrad Adenauer Stiftung. pp. 45–50, 59–61.


Further reading[edit]
Cheryl Lyn Dybas, "A Wolf in Jackal's Clothing", Africa Geographic (July 2012)
Cheryl Lyn Dybas, "In the Long Shadow of the Pyramids and Beyond: Glimpse of an African... Wolf?", International Wolf Center (Spring 2015)
Hugo van Lawick & Jane Goodall (1971), Innocent Killers, Houghton Mifflin Company Boston
External links[edit]



Wikispecies has information related to African golden wolf (Canis lupaster).

(in Arabic) Le fantôme du moyen Atlas شبح الأطلس المتوسط, AmouddouTV (Feb 13, 2014)
(in Arabic) Nouveau!! Nouvelle espèce découverte... اكتشاف نوع جديد من الحيوانات/ حصري, AmouddouTV (Aug 15, 2015)
vteExtant Carnivora species
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Chordata
Class: Mammalia
Infraclass: Eutheria
Superorder: Laurasiatheria
Suborder FeliformiaNandiniidaeNandinia
African palm civet (N. binotata)
Herpestidae(Mongooses)Atilax
Marsh mongoose (A. paludinosus)
Bdeogale
Bushy-tailed mongoose (B. crassicauda)
Jackson's mongoose (B. jacksoni)
Black-footed mongoose (B. nigripes)
Crossarchus
Alexander's kusimanse (C. alexandri)
Angolan kusimanse (C. ansorgei)
Common kusimanse (C. obscurus)
Flat-headed kusimanse (C. platycephalus)
Cynictis
Yellow mongoose (C. penicillata)
Dologale
Pousargues's mongoose (D. dybowskii)
Helogale
Ethiopian dwarf mongoose (H. hirtula)
Common dwarf mongoose (H. parvula)
Herpestes
Angolan slender mongoose (H. flavescens)
Egyptian mongoose (H. ichneumon)
Somalian slender mongoose (H. ochracea)
Cape gray mongoose (H. pulverulenta)
Common slender mongoose (H. sanguinea)
Ichneumia
White-tailed mongoose (I. albicauda)
Liberiictus
Liberian mongoose (L. kuhni)
Mungos
Gambian mongoose (M. gambianus)
Banded mongoose (M. mungo)
Paracynictis
Selous's mongoose (P. selousi)
Rhynchogale
Meller's mongoose (R. melleri)
Suricata
Meerkat (S. suricatta)
Urva
Small Indian mongoose (U. auropunctata)
Short-tailed mongoose (U. brachyura)
Indian grey mongoose (U. edwardsii)
Indian brown mongoose (U. fusca)
Javan mongoose (U. javanica)
Collared mongoose (U. semitorquata)
Ruddy mongoose (U. smithii)
Crab-eating mongoose (U. urva)
Stripe-necked mongoose (U. vitticolla)
Xenogale
Long-nosed mongoose (X. naso)
Hyaenidae(Hyenas)Crocuta
Spotted hyena (C. crocuta)
Hyaena
Striped hyena (H. hyaena)
Parahyaena
Brown hyena (P. brunnea)
Proteles
Aardwolf (P. cristata)
FelidaeLarge family listed belowViverridaeLarge family listed belowEupleridaeSmall family listed belowFamily FelidaeFelinaeAcinonyx
Cheetah (A. jubatus)
Caracal
African golden cat (C. aurata)
Caracal (C. caracal)
Catopuma
Bay cat (C. badia)
Asian golden cat (C. temminckii)
Felis
Chinese mountain cat (F. bieti)
Domestic cat (F. catus)
Jungle cat (F. chaus)
African wildcat (F. lybica)
Sand cat (F. margarita)
Black-footed cat (F. nigripes)
European wildcat (F. silvestris)
Herpailurus
Jaguarundi (H. yagouaroundi)
Leopardus
Pantanal cat (L. braccatus)
Pampas cat (L. colocola)
Eastern oncilla (L. emiliae)
Northern colocolo (L. garleppi)
Geoffroy's cat (L. geoffroyi)
Kodkod (L. guigna)
Southern tiger cat (L. guttulus)
Andean mountain cat (L. jacobita)
Muñoa's colocolo (L. munoai)
Southern colocolo (L. pajeros)
Ocelot (L. pardalis)
Oncilla (L. tigrinus)
Margay (L. wiedii)
Leptailurus
Serval (L. serval)
Lynx
Canada lynx (L. canadensis)
Eurasian lynx (L. lynx)
Iberian lynx (L. pardinus)
Bobcat (L. rufus)
Otocolobus
Pallas's cat (O. manul)
Pardofelis
Marbled cat (P. marmorata)
Prionailurus
Leopard cat (P. bengalensis)
Sunda leopard cat  (P. javanensis)
Flat-headed cat (P. planiceps)
Rusty-spotted cat (P. rubiginosus)
Fishing cat (P. viverrinus)
Puma
Cougar (P. concolor)
PantherinaePanthera
Lion (P. leo)
Jaguar (P. onca)
Leopard (P. pardus)
Tiger (P. tigris)
Snow leopard (P. uncia)
Neofelis
Sunda clouded leopard (N. diardi)
Clouded leopard (N. nebulosa)
PrionodontidaePrionodon
Banded linsang (P. linsang)
Spotted linsang (P. pardicolor)
Family ViverridaeParadoxurinaeArctictis
Binturong (A. binturong)
Arctogalidia
Small-toothed palm civet (A. trivirgata)
Macrogalidia
Sulawesi palm civet (M. musschenbroekii)
Paguma
Masked palm civet (P. larvata)
Paradoxurus
Asian palm civet (P. hermaphroditus)
Brown palm civet (P. jerdoni)
Golden palm civet (P. zeylonensis)
HemigalinaeChrotogale
Owston's palm civet (C. owstoni)
Cynogale
Otter civet (C. bennettii)
Diplogale
Hose's palm civet (D. hosei)
Hemigalus
Banded palm civet (H. derbyanus)
ViverrinaeCivettictis
African civet (C. civetta)
Viverra
Malabar large-spotted civet (V. civettina)
Large-spotted civet (V. megaspila)
Malayan civet (V. tangalunga)
Large Indian civet (V. zibetha)
Viverricula
Small Indian civet (V. indica)
GenettinaeGenetta(Genets)
Abyssinian genet (G. abyssinica)
Angolan genet (G. angolensis)
Bourlon's genet (G. bourloni)
Crested servaline genet (G. cristata)
Common genet (G. genetta)
Johnston's genet (G. johnstoni)
Letaba genet (G. letabae)
Rusty-spotted genet (G. maculata)
Pardine genet (G. pardina)
Aquatic genet (G. piscivora)
King genet (G. poensis)
Servaline genet (G. servalina)
Hausa genet (G. thierryi)
Cape genet (G. tigrina)
Giant forest genet (G. victoriae)
Poiana
Central African oyan (P. richardsonii)
West African oyan (P. leightoni)
Family EupleridaeEuplerinaeCryptoprocta
Fossa (C. ferox)
Eupleres
Eastern falanouc (E. goudotii)
Western falanouc (E. major)
Fossa
Malagasy civet (F. fossana)
GalidiinaeGalidia
Ring-tailed vontsira (G. elegans)
Galidictis
Broad-striped Malagasy mongoose (G. fasciata)
Grandidier's mongoose (G. grandidieri)
Mungotictis
Narrow-striped mongoose (M. decemlineata)
Salanoia
Brown-tailed mongoose (S. concolor)
Durrell's vontsira (S. durrelli)
Suborder Caniformia (cont. below)Ursidae(Bears)Ailuropoda
Giant panda (A. melanoleuca)
Helarctos
Sun bear (H. malayanus)
Melursus
Sloth bear (M. ursinus)
Tremarctos
Spectacled bear (T. ornatus)
Ursus
American black bear (U. americanus)
Brown bear (U. arctos)
Polar bear (U. maritimus)
Asian black bear (U. thibetanus)
Mephitidae(Skunks)Conepatus(Hog-nosedskunks)
Molina's hog-nosed skunk (C. chinga)
American hog-nosed skunk (C. leuconotus)
Striped hog-nosed skunk (C. semistriatus)
Mephitis
Hooded skunk (M. macroura)
Striped skunk (M. mephitis)
Mydaus
Sunda stink badger (M. javanensis)
Palawan stink badger (M. marchei)
Spilogale(Spotted skunks)
Southern spotted skunk (S. angustifrons)
Western spotted skunk (S. gracilis)
Eastern spotted skunk (S. putorius)
Pygmy spotted skunk (S. pygmaea)
Procyonidae(Raccoons, coatis, olingos)Bassaricyon(Olingos)
Eastern lowland olingo (B. alleni)
Northern olingo (B. gabbii)
Western lowland olingo (B. medius)
Olinguito (B. neblina)
Bassariscus
Ringtail (B. astutus)
Cacomistle (B. sumichrasti)
Nasua(Coatis inclusive)
White-nosed coati (N. narica)
South American coati (N. nasua)
Nasuella(Coatis inclusive)
Western mountain coati (N. olivacea)
Potos
Kinkajou (P. flavus)
Procyon
Crab-eating raccoon (P. cancrivorus)
Raccoon (P. lotor)
Cozumel raccoon (P. pygmaeus)
AiluridaeAilurus
Red panda (A. fulgens)
Suborder Caniformia (cont. above)Otariidae(Eared seals)(includes fur sealsand sea lions)(Pinniped inclusive)Arctocephalus
South American fur seal (A. australis)
Australasian fur seal (A. forsteri)
Galápagos fur seal (A. galapagoensis)
Antarctic fur seal (A. gazella)
Juan Fernández fur seal (A. philippii)
Brown fur seal (A. pusillus)
Guadalupe fur seal (A. townsendi)
Subantarctic fur seal (A. tropicalis)
Callorhinus
Northern fur seal (C. ursinus)
Eumetopias
Steller sea lion (E. jubatus)
Neophoca
Australian sea lion (N. cinerea)
Otaria
South American sea lion (O. flavescens)
Phocarctos
New Zealand sea lion (P. hookeri)
Zalophus
California sea lion (Z. californianus)
Galápagos sea lion (Z. wollebaeki)
Odobenidae(Pinniped inclusive)Odobenus
Walrus (O. rosmarus)
Phocidae(Earless seals)(Pinniped inclusive)Cystophora
Hooded seal (C. cristata)
Erignathus
Bearded seal (E. barbatus)
Halichoerus
Grey seal (H. grypus)
Histriophoca
Ribbon seal (H. fasciata)
Hydrurga
Leopard seal (H. leptonyx)
Leptonychotes
Weddell seal (L. weddellii)
Lobodon
Crabeater seal (L. carcinophagus)
Mirounga(Elephant seals)
Northern elephant seal (M. angustirostris)
Southern elephant seal (M. leonina)
Monachus
Mediterranean monk seal (M. monachus)
Neomonachus
Hawaiian monk seal (N. schauinslandi)
Ommatophoca
Ross seal (O. rossi)
Pagophilus
Harp seal (P. groenlandicus)
Phoca
Spotted seal (P. largha)
Harbor seal (P. vitulina)
Pusa
Caspian seal (P. caspica)
Ringed seal (P. hispida)
Baikal seal (P. sibirica)
CanidaeLarge family listed belowMustelidaeLarge family listed belowFamily Canidae (includes dogs)Atelocynus
Short-eared dog (A. microtis)
Canis
Golden jackal (C. aureus)
Domestic dog (C. familiaris)
Coyote (C. latrans)
African wolf (C. lupaster)
Wolf (C. lupus)
Eastern wolf (C. lycaon)
Red wolf (C. rufus)
Ethiopian wolf (C. simensis)
Cerdocyon
Crab-eating fox (C. thous)
Chrysocyon
Maned wolf (C. brachyurus)
Cuon
Dhole (C. alpinus)
Lupulella
Side-striped jackal (L. adustus)
Black-backed jackal (L. mesomelas)
Lycalopex
Culpeo (L. culpaeus)
Darwin's fox (L. fulvipes)
South American gray fox (L. griseus)
Pampas fox (L. gymnocercus)
Sechuran fox (L. sechurae)
Hoary fox (L. vetulus)
Lycaon
African wild dog (L. pictus)
Nyctereutes
Common raccoon dog (N. procyonoides)
Japanese raccoon dog (N. viverrinus)
Otocyon
Bat-eared fox (O. megalotis)
Speothos
Bush dog (S. venaticus)
Urocyon
Gray fox (U. cinereoargenteus)
Island fox (U. littoralis)
Vulpes (Foxes)
Bengal fox (V. bengalensis)
Blanford's fox (V. cana)
Cape fox (V. chama)
Corsac fox (V. corsac)
Tibetan fox (V. ferrilata)
Arctic fox (V. lagopus)
Kit fox (V. macrotis)
Pale fox (V. pallida)
Rüppell's fox (V. rueppelli)
Swift fox (V. velox)
Red fox (V. vulpes)
Fennec fox (V. zerda)
Family MustelidaeHelictidinae(Ferret-badgers)Melogale
Bornean ferret badger (M. everetti)
Chinese ferret-badger (M. moschata)
Javan ferret-badger (M. orientalis)
Burmese ferret-badger (M. personata)
Vietnam ferret-badger (M. cucphuongensis)
Guloninae(Martens and wolverines)Eira
Tayra (E. barbara)
Gulo
Wolverine (G. gulo)
Martes(Martens)
American marten (M. americana)
Pacific marten (M. caurina)
Yellow-throated marten (M. flavigula)
Beech marten (M. foina)
Nilgiri marten (M. gwatkinsii)
European pine marten (M. martes)
Japanese marten (M. melampus)
Sable (M. zibellina)
Pekania
Fisher (P. pennanti)
Ictonychinae(African polecats and grisons)Galictis
Lesser grison (G. cuja)
Greater grison (G. vittata)
Ictonyx
Saharan striped polecat (I. libyca)
Striped polecat (I. striatus)
Lyncodon
Patagonian weasel (L. patagonicus)
Poecilogale
African striped weasel (P. albinucha)
Vormela
Marbled polecat (V. peregusna)
Lutrinae(Otters)Aonyx
African clawless otter (A. capensis)
Asian small-clawed otter (A. cinereus)
Congo clawless otter (A. congicus)
Enhydra
Sea otter (E. lutris)
Hydrictis
Spotted-necked otter (H. maculicollis)
Lontra
North American river otter (L. canadensis)
Marine otter (L. felina)
Neotropical otter (L. longicaudis)
Southern river otter (L. provocax)
Lutra
Eurasian otter (L. lutra)
Hairy-nosed otter (L. sumatrana)
Lutrogale
Smooth-coated otter (L. perspicillata)
Pteronura
Giant otter (P. brasiliensis)
Melinae(Eurasian badgers)Arctonyx
Northern hog badger (A. albogularis)
Greater hog badger (A. collaris)
Sumatran hog badger (A. hoevenii)
Meles
Japanese badger (M. anakuma)
Caucasian badger (M. canescens)
Asian badger (M. leucurus)
European badger (M. meles)
MellivorinaeMellivora
Honey badger (M. capensis)
Mustelinae(Weasels and minks)Mustela(Weasels and ferrets)
Mountain weasel (M. altaica)
Stoat/Beringian ermine (M. erminea)
Steppe polecat (M. eversmannii)
Ferret (M. furo)
Haida ermine (M. haidarum)
Japanese weasel (M. itatsi)
Yellow-bellied weasel (M. kathiah)
European mink (M. lutreola)
Indonesian mountain weasel (M. lutreolina)
Black-footed ferret (M. nigripes)
Least weasel (M. nivalis)
Malayan weasel (M. nudipes)
European polecat (M. putorius)
American ermine (M. richardsonii)
Siberian weasel (M. sibirica)
Back-striped weasel (M. strigidorsa)
Neogale
Amazon weasel (N. africana)
Colombian weasel (N. felipei)
Long-tailed weasel (N. frenata)
American mink (N. vison)
TaxidiinaeTaxidea
American badger (T. taxus)

Taxon identifiers
Wikidata: Q20744349
Wikispecies: Canis anthus
BioLib: 460529
CoL: QLX6
EoL: 28780644
Fossilworks: 233548
iNaturalist: 546402
ITIS: 998421
NCBI: 1707807
ZooBank: 9A832A01-791D-459B-930E-35E69DD35ADA





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=African_wolf&oldid=1116858521"
Categories: IUCN Red List least concern speciesCanisWolvesCarnivorans of AfricaMammals of AfricaPleistocene carnivoransExtant Calabrian first appearancesMammals described in 1820Hidden categories: CS1: long volume valueCS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles with Spanish-language sources (es)Articles with French-language sources (fr)Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 German-language sources (de)Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles with 'species' microformatsArticles containing Fula-language textArticles with Arabic-language sources (ar)AC with 0 elements



Navigation menu



Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in





Namespaces


ArticleTalk





English









Views


ReadEditView history





More








Search



















Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version




In other projects


Wikimedia CommonsWikispecies




Languages


العربيةБългарскиCatalàЧӑвашлаCebuanoČeštinaDeutschDiné bizaadΕλληνικάEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançais한국어Bahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaעבריתKiswahiliLatviešuMagyarМакедонскиBahasa Melayu日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaTaqbaylitTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 18 October 2022, at 18:16 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement







































































































Wolf Sharing Food Market Bruxelles


































 FRFRENNLÀ PROPOSPoké ClubDim'sEaters10 gramsLa PiolaSharkDierendonckBolllyfood StoriesToukoulLes Super Filles du TramHyggeIdeaHanoi StationMy TannourVincent DenisMICRO-BRASSERIEEVENTSSTORYCONTACT/FAQMoreUse tab to navigate through the menu items.




POKÉ CLUB




DIM'S




EATERS




10 GRAMS




LA PIOLA PIZZA




TOUKOUL




HANOI STATION




SHARK




SUPER FILLES




MY TANNOUR




DIERENDONCK




HYGGE




BOLLYFOOD




IDEA




VINCENT DENISDix-sept restaurants
et deux barsUn tour du monde culinaire au travers de dix-sept propositions : sushis, pâtes fraiches faites maison, pains libanais cuits sur place, burgers, cuisine thaï, végane,... sans oublier le bar à dessert proposé par Vincent Denis, un patissier récompensé à l'international. Grâce à la micro-brasserie et au savoir-faire belge, la bière FLOW est brassée sur place.
 




MICRO-BRASSERIE




ÉVÉNEMENTSWinner public prize 2020Best gourmet concept 2020© BXL Food Market | Vie privée | Disclaimer | Cookies  | Made by Sidenote 















  

Wolf Cabinets & Wolf Vanities For Kitchen & Bath | Wolf Home Products















































































Skip to main content




















Contact Us
Find A Contractor
Where To Buy
Dealer Toolbox
We're Hiring
 



ProductsKitchenCabinetryWolf ClassicWolf SignatureWolf DesignerWolf EndeavorBuilders MarkBathVanity TopsSolid SurfaceQuartzNatural GraniteEngineered StoneCultured MarbleShowersOutdoor LivingDecking & PorchWolf Perspective DeckingWolf Serenity DeckingWolf Serenity PorchRailingOutdoor CabinetsOutdoor LightingBuilding ProductsSidingTrim & MouldingsPartner BrandsInspirationKitchen & Bath GalleryCabinetry & Vanity TopsOutdoor Living GalleryDecking & Porch, Railing, Outdoor Cabinets & LightingBuilding Products GallerySiding, Trim & MouldingsSupportKitchen & BathCare & MaintenanceWarrantyWhere To BuyOutdoor LivingCare & MaintenanceWarrantyWhere To BuyBuilding ProductsWarrantyWhere To BuyProfessionalsDealersDealer PortalToolbox LoginSubmit A PhotoContractorsWolf PRO ProgramRequest TrainingWolf PRO Portal LoginShare A ProjectArchitects3-Part Specs, Code  Reports, & MoreMultifamilyWolf Multifamily & HomebuildingAboutAbout WolfHistoryLeadershipMedia RelationsBlogWhy WolfAdvantagesCore ValuesThe Wolf DifferenceCareersWork at WolfCurrent OpportunitiesCommunityWolf Conservation CenterCommunity Involvement
 















Apply




 




















 















Apply




 









ProductsKitchenCabinetryBathVanity TopsShowersOutdoor LivingDecking & PorchRailingOutdoor CabinetsOutdoor LightingBuilding ProductsSidingTrim & MouldingsPartner BrandsInspirationKitchen & Bath GalleryCabinetry & Vanity TopsOutdoor Living GalleryDecking & Porch, Railing, Outdoor Cabinets & LightingBuilding Products GallerySiding, Trim & MouldingsSupportKitchen & BathCare & MaintenanceWarrantyWhere To BuyOutdoor LivingCare & MaintenanceWarrantyWhere To BuyBuilding ProductsWarrantyWhere To BuyProfessionalsDealersDealer PortalToolbox LoginSubmit A PhotoContractorsWolf PRO ProgramRequest TrainingWolf PRO Portal LoginShare A ProjectArchitects3-Part Specs, Code  Reports, & MoreMultifamilyWolf Multifamily & HomebuildingAboutAbout WolfHistoryLeadershipMedia RelationsBlogWhy WolfAdvantagesCore ValuesThe Wolf DifferenceCareersWork at WolfCurrent OpportunitiesCommunityWolf Conservation CenterCommunity Involvement

Contact Us
Find A Contractor
Where To Buy
Dealer Toolbox
We're Hiring
 




+
Updates and resources for our communities during COVID-19 Learn More




















Contact Us
Find A Contractor
Where To Buy
Dealer Toolbox
We're Hiring
 



ProductsKitchenCabinetryWolf ClassicWolf SignatureWolf DesignerWolf EndeavorBuilders MarkBathVanity TopsSolid SurfaceQuartzNatural GraniteEngineered StoneCultured MarbleShowersOutdoor LivingDecking & PorchWolf Perspective DeckingWolf Serenity DeckingWolf Serenity PorchRailingOutdoor CabinetsOutdoor LightingBuilding ProductsSidingTrim & MouldingsPartner BrandsInspirationKitchen & Bath GalleryCabinetry & Vanity TopsOutdoor Living GalleryDecking & Porch, Railing, Outdoor Cabinets & LightingBuilding Products GallerySiding, Trim & MouldingsSupportKitchen & BathCare & MaintenanceWarrantyWhere To BuyOutdoor LivingCare & MaintenanceWarrantyWhere To BuyBuilding ProductsWarrantyWhere To BuyProfessionalsDealersDealer PortalToolbox LoginSubmit A PhotoContractorsWolf PRO ProgramRequest TrainingWolf PRO Portal LoginShare A ProjectArchitects3-Part Specs, Code  Reports, & MoreMultifamilyWolf Multifamily & HomebuildingAboutAbout WolfHistoryLeadershipMedia RelationsBlogWhy WolfAdvantagesCore ValuesThe Wolf DifferenceCareersWork at WolfCurrent OpportunitiesCommunityWolf Conservation CenterCommunity Involvement
 















Apply




 




















 















Apply




 









ProductsKitchenCabinetryBathVanity TopsShowersOutdoor LivingDecking & PorchRailingOutdoor CabinetsOutdoor LightingBuilding ProductsSidingTrim & MouldingsPartner BrandsInspirationKitchen & Bath GalleryCabinetry & Vanity TopsOutdoor Living GalleryDecking & Porch, Railing, Outdoor Cabinets & LightingBuilding Products GallerySiding, Trim & MouldingsSupportKitchen & BathCare & MaintenanceWarrantyWhere To BuyOutdoor LivingCare & MaintenanceWarrantyWhere To BuyBuilding ProductsWarrantyWhere To BuyProfessionalsDealersDealer PortalToolbox LoginSubmit A PhotoContractorsWolf PRO ProgramRequest TrainingWolf PRO Portal LoginShare A ProjectArchitects3-Part Specs, Code  Reports, & MoreMultifamilyWolf Multifamily & HomebuildingAboutAbout WolfHistoryLeadershipMedia RelationsBlogWhy WolfAdvantagesCore ValuesThe Wolf DifferenceCareersWork at WolfCurrent OpportunitiesCommunityWolf Conservation CenterCommunity Involvement

Contact Us
Find A Contractor
Where To Buy
Dealer Toolbox
We're Hiring
 










Social Share













FORM & FUNCTIONMEET



Wolf Classic™

	Cabinetry



Explore












EXCEPTIONALLY BEAUTIFULAMAZINGLY DURABLE



Wolf Portrait™

	High-Density Cellular™ Siding



Explore













STYLE AND FUNCTIONAT JUST THE RIGHT PRICE



Wolf Endeavor™

	Cabinetry



Explore












HIGH STYLELOW STRESS



Wolf Serenity™

	Decking



Explore





















FORM & FUNCTIONMEET



Wolf Classic™

	Cabinetry



Explore












EXCEPTIONALLY BEAUTIFULAMAZINGLY DURABLE



Wolf Portrait™

	High-Density Cellular™ Siding



Explore













STYLE AND FUNCTIONAT JUST THE RIGHT PRICE



Wolf Endeavor™

	Cabinetry



Explore












HIGH STYLELOW STRESS



Wolf Serenity™

	Decking



Explore















 



Cabinetry


	Have the kitchen you’ve always wanted. Wolf Cabinetry offers the choices to suit every home, every style, every need and every budget.

View more









Decking & Porch


	Wolf Decking & Porch delivers the natural-looking decking colors to complement your style and decking materials built to withstand the weather. 

View more









Siding


	Wolf Siding and Accessories offer head-turning looks everyone will admire and protection you’ll appreciate through every season.

View More









Railing


	Wolf Railing seamlessly combines simplicity, versatility and affordability into PVC railing that will maintain its good looks for years to come.

View More









Vanity Tops


	Made from the most in-demand materials, Wolf Vanity Tops deliver the selection and styles that are sure to bring together any bath.

View more









Outdoor Lighting


	Outdoor lighting designed for a number of decking areas, including on balusters, on stairs, and under railings. 

View More









Trim & Mouldings


	Available in smooth matte and rich woodgrain, Wolf Trim has all the advantages of premium PVC performance — without the premium price.

View More









Outdoor Cabinets


	Wolf Endurance Outdoor Cabinetry is easy to configure, handle and install, and the price is easy on your wallet. 

View More





 











Right Style
 
	We have a vast selection of Wolf Products. Whether you prefer traditional or ultra contemporary styles, Wolf Cabinets, Wolf Decking, and Wolf Building Products offer the choices to let your personality shine throughout your home — inside and out.
 









Kitchen & Bath Gallery






Outdoor Living Gallery






Building Product Gallery














Right At Home
 






	Planning a home improvement project with Wolf Home Products is easy because you’ll have an experienced team with you every step of the way. We’ll provide the support you need to make decisions that are right for you and your home.
 Where to Buy 









				@wolfhomeproducts



				Share Your Project and Win!


Find us on Instagram




				The Wolf Blog
 

				Design Trends to Backyard Makeovers.


Read the Wolf Blog










	The Wolf Advantage



 Built on more than 175 years of experience.



 Premium products without the premium price.



 Correct delivery the first time or we make it right.



See More 

















Kitchen & Bath

Cabinetry
Vanity Tops
Photo Gallery

 

Outdoor Living

Decking & Porch
Outdoor Cabinets
Outdoor Lighting
Photo Gallery

 

Building Products

Siding & Accessories
Trim & Mouldings
Exterior & Interior
Photo Gallery

 


Support
Kitchen & Bath
Outdoor Living
Building Products

 


Professionals
Dealer Portal
Submit A Photo
Wolf Pro Program
Wolf Pro Portal Login
Wolf Tracks
Architect Portal
Multifamily & Homebuilding

 


About Wolf
Contact Us
Blog
History
Management
Press Room
Advantages
Core Values
Careers

 











Kitchen & Bath


Cabinetry
Vanity Tops
Photo Gallery

 


Outdoor Living


Decking & Porch
Outdoor Cabinets
Outdoor Lighting
Photo Gallery

 


Building Products


Siding & Accessories
Trim & Mouldings
Exterior & Interior
Photo Gallery

 


Support


Support
Kitchen & Bath
Outdoor Living
Building Products

 


Professionals


Professionals
Dealer Portal
Submit A Photo
Wolf Pro Program
Wolf Pro Portal Login
Wolf Tracks
Architect Portal
Multifamily & Homebuilding

 


About Wolf


About Wolf
Contact Us
Blog
History
Management
Press Room
Advantages
Core Values
Careers

 








Connect with wolf











&copy2022 Wolf Home Products. All Rights Reserved. | Privacy Policy|Sitemap | User Agreement
















